atheism and debates about atheism  were one of the most important  intellectual cross currents  of the 18th century  if you were teaching a high school  course  or university course  on the intellectual history of the 18th  century you talk a lot about atheism  it's one of the most important  topics one of the most important flash  points for political and philosophical  debate  in the 19th century  then in the 20th century  things get violent  and things get surreal  it's very different than when we talk  about atheism in the 20th century as  opposed to the 19th century in the 18th  century right if you talk about the 18th  century you're talking about voltaire  when you're talking about the 20th  century you're talking about lenin  i'm talking about atheism  as advocated by  the communists who violently took over  russia created the soviet union in a  civil war  et cetera et cetera you get to talk  about mao zedong  and you know in case you didn't know the  relationship of each of these uh  despotisms to atheism was  much more fraught with contradiction and  difficulty than you might at first like  to imagine it's not the case that's  simply communism  i think nobody in their right mind  looking back at the last several  centuries nobody could claim that  communism advanced the cause of atheism  of course to a large extent it  discredited it but um  you know apart from such normative  judgments it's not the case that even in  a consistent way advocated for atheism  throughout the the century or so of  communism uh being in vogue being a  powerful world embracing ideology now  here we are  in the 21st century  when i first started paying attention to  youtube which was coincidentally when i  had i was going to say divorced my wife  but legally speaking that's when i had  separated from my wife and then we  started employing lawyers and it took  years to get divorced legally but i just  uh just dumped my first life  and found myself suddenly more time in  my hands  and found myself thinking about what  kind of videos i wanted to make on  youtube and how my own daughter might  grow up one day to get to know the kind  of man i was  by seeing my face and seeing my voice on  youtube at that moment  there was a lot of talk about atheism on  this very platform and throughout the  whole of the internet now  it's important to note that at that time  youtube was not the leading medium  social media generally things like  twitter and so on and tumblr that did  exist at that time  these were not leading the discussion  they were actually catching up with  something that had been in vogue many  years earlier they were catching up with  the old-fashioned printing press  and television and radio if you look at  the timeline of when the so-called four  horsemen of atheism came into vogue of  when the books were best sellers of when  these things were discussed on radio and  tv and broadcast news actually  old-fashioned media broadcast media  books and so on those were out there  first um  and then youtube was catching up  afterwards but here was this new  boisterous  uh participatory  interactive medium  taking the debate about atheism places  it had never gone before taking it into  people's homes and workplaces and into  podcasts and getting in in the same room  sometimes literally sometimes via you  know internet telephony getting  traditional christian preachers together  with advocates of atheism and having  them meet each other and speak to each  other and hear each other's positions  this was something new i mean i do not  think ever on  cnn maybe cnn's a bad example even say  public access television i can remember  the old religious programs wherever you  are sorry if you live in america or  canada i actually don't know if europe  is like this there used to be this  really low budget broadcast you know  called cable access television public  access television  and oh god every uh every two-bit cult  and religious group had a program uh and  once in a while in some areas there'd be  a call-in show for atheists uh to  compete with with all that noise but i  would say  probably nowhere in the world was the  the opportunity before that we had here  on youtube to bring those people  together contrast their views you know  and and and for us all to learn from the  wisdom and the folly of the ensuing  debates so  even though youtube and social media  actually lagged behind print media lag  behind even what was in the newspapers  of the time  it then brought this new vitality  to the discourse about atheism and  someone in my position at that time just  split up  with my first wife  and i've just split up with my religion  i mean i just turned the corner was like  okay me and buddhism are done  [Laughter]  again if you guys are interested i can  talk more about the timeline of my my  interaction with buddhism and it was  reasonable for me to expect  wow so here we are at the start of a new  century the 21st century and atheism is  once again going to become a major  epoch defining area of political  discourse  this is going to become another  century-defining debate  atheism and the future of religion in  our times and i was wrong  the reality is that youtube  has become  a century defining the subject of  social media the format itself would go  on to change the century this this what  we're doing right now i'm live streaming  anyone in my audience hi frieda anyone  wants to talk to me talking about this  would change the century come this would  become a popular permanent aspect of our  culture but the interest in atheism  would prove to be unbelievably  shallow  and fleeting  now i'm always suspicious of this word  uh necessity and necessary these  concepts  uh in english you know i think it's very  easy for anyone to take a step back  and look at their own culture  and it may be even easier to look at a  foreign culture and say okay well this  is a necessary change that things must  change  there's a necessary change to come here  now you guys may not know tibetan  buddhism the way i know  tibetan buddhism  traditionally  tibetan buddhism included  sex rituals what people now call tantric  sex rituals but regardless  tibetan buddhism  included  human sacrifice  tibetan buddhism included taking the  skull  from a human sacrifice  cutting it fashioning it into a bowl  that you could eat from a magical bowl  made out of a human skull  anyone can take a step back and look at  that and say  this is the 21st century  this has got to change  things can't citizen it's necessary  what are you going to do to change it  now in case you don't know this is a  highly hypothetical discussion because  what actually happened to tibet was that  they were conquered by the communist  army of china they were incorporated  into communist china and their whole  tradition was obliterated and then kind  of reconstructed uh thereafter currently  there's a bit of a phony revival of  buddhism in tibet but as you can imagine  some things get revived and not others  so the performance of the epic of geshar  is being revived it's a traditional uh  pseudo-historical narrative of a  historical figure sort of like king  arthur the equivalent of king arthur and  tibet the communist party has allowed  that to be revived but i think you can  imagine a variety of things from tantric  sex rituals to human sacrifice uh nobody  is going to tolerate that being revived  in the in the 21st century you know okay  so that's that's easy it's easy to see  this as  necessary right  what's not easy is looking at your own  life and looking at the 20 years you  have in front of you the next 20 years  in the future saying what are you going  to do about it what are you going to do  to make it happen really thinking  through for whom is it necessary what  does it even mean to say that this is  this is necessary it's a necessary  change  that has to come  when you walk through the streets  of montreal quebec  when you walk through the streets of  paris france you are surrounded  by church architecture on all sides  predominantly catholic  but if you look carefully there are  other forms of christianity competing  with the catholic church you are  enclosed by the accumulated  brickwork  of so many centuries  of  religious history  when you watch  star trek  is that what life  looks like when you watch star wars is  that what life looks like i i don't know  that many current gen science fiction  shows when you watch firefly when you  watch babylon five you know what i don't  know you guys could fill in the blank  smear whenever you watch depictions of  the future including even some really  grim  depictions of the post-apocalyptic  future you know is life  dominated  by  the christian church by the catholic  church is life dominated by  islam in this way is that the future  we assume for ourselves now you know it  may be a little bit more subtle than  talking about human sacrifice but it's  not that it's not that  you know  um  it's amazing to me that people don't  even really  think about this  do you believe that in the future people  should live in celibacy until marriage  i think we have a really complex  cultural  debate to engage in about you know age  of consent and when people should start  having sex and that's something  i think even most parents just avoid  thinking about you know are we moving  towards a culture where people start  having sex at age 14  or are we moving towards a culture where  everyone's expected to remain celibate  until age 18. in some jurisdictions  that's the case we're like it's criminal  for anyone to have sex with anyone below  age 18. what what is the solution but in  any case you know oh  does the future involve  circumcision  does the future involve arranged  marriage does the future involve  celibacy until marriage does the future  involve the church controlling your fate  in this way you know  when i was on the cambridge  when i was on the cambridge when i was  on the campus  of cambridge university england what  freaked me out wasn't the church  architecture and it wasn't the singing  of church hymns  it was the fact that i was surrounded by  people who were left-wing  secular intellectuals left-wing atheists  and even communists there were a lot of  communists at cambridge university and  they had no problem with this  and they were attending the church  services i i didn't know any who were  literally singing in the choir but they  were going to hear these songs being  sung and attend these services in these  centuries-old  cathedrals in cambridge okay well gee it  seemed really simple before when you  were talking about the demolition  of a foreign exotic cultures  religious tradition right we were  talking about persecuting buddhist monks  and saying no no no you can't do these  things anymore that have been part of  your sacred tradition for  for centuries oh no no you have to  change you have to be forced you have to  be compelled to change and then as soon  as you shift it back to a culture that's  more familiar to you as soon as you're  talking about you know the the  cathedrals of cambridge england as soon  as you're talking about the church  architecture in paris as soon as you're  talking about the reality of walking  down the  street in montreal suddenly you become  uncomfortable what is going to change  if our if our presumption is  that change is  necessary what does that necessity  really mean  one of the chief differences between the  17th century sorry i guess i should say  18th century we could talk about 17th  century of them too let's talk about the  18th century and people like the baron  de olbach  improve my french if you can uh the ol  bach  the boron de hobart in english  um  talking about 18th century atheism right  these were people witnessing the  transformation of society by scientific  breakthroughs and by what we would now  call  industrialization with  rapidly improving quality of life  rapidly improving standards living for  everyone you know the emergence  of flowing water through a pipe whether  that's a tap to wash your hands  eventually you know the invention of the  toilet you know they're all these kind  of miracles that we now take utterly for  granted the first breakthroughs in  understanding electricity which would  eventually be harnessed to provide us  with lights and radios and all these  other again things we take out early for  granted all these other  conveniences of modern life just at the  start of that and seeing the  transformation of life that was  accomplished by things like the  mechanization of the production of  fabric  going from a world imagine yourself  living in a world where every pair of  socks  worn by every man woman and child rich  or poor was knitted  by hand everyone is wearing hand-knitted  socks to a world where they're a factory  produced sock it's a big change it's a  big difference okay um  the transformation of life and you see  the peasants who used to be tending  goats and sheep now working inside that  factory and producing you know those  those materials and wearing them  themselves and you see wow  now with factory production  the average  urban  poor person  running out of vocabulary  the average worker shall we say the  average employed person in the city can  now afford clothing better than kings  and queens could afford just uh just a  century ago the quality of life is  improving so rapidly there was a  reckless confidence in the 18th century  that improving standard of living  improving technology and  simply  uh the carrot and stick of science  education would wipe out the  superstitions of the dark ages would  wipe out religion that religion would  either cease to exist or it would be  transformed it would be rationalized it  would become an unrecognizable modern uh  version of itself now in our own times i  remember reading the autobiography  of i'm sorry this wasn't quite known  about clever in a second uh but it was  it was a book like an autobiography of a  diplomat sent from  i think it was from england to saudi  arabia so so it was it was really a book  about the political history of saudi  arabia but it was written by someone who  had lived there and worked there and  seen the transformation so i'm sorry  autobiography is not quite the right  term  but i remember this guy saying so if you  guys don't know there were a lot of  british out there  you know saudi arabia wasn't always  called saudi arabia and iraq wasn't  always called iraq and so on but the  british empire and the french empire  were out there mucking around in arabia  broadly defined the arab and iranian  part of the world  arab and persian  semi-continent or whatever  um  and you know  reading someone like that lives that  period of time describing  you know there was a time  when water was precious here  there was a time when someone would load  up their mule and make a two day journey  to get water and carry it back and now  they have the oil industry  and the oil industry has financed the  government building  plumbing  building pipes  that have made water  worthless and free and so you turn on  the tap and instantly you have an  unlimited unmeasured supply of of water  water once scarce  has become ubiquitous this you know  really unimaginable uh transformation of  society  and you know it's easy to be cynical  about this but especially if you take a  centuries-long view of it if you're  looking over say a 200-year period  even though saudi arabia is a country  with a very deep division between rich  and poor in this sense the material  conditions of the poorest people  they've been transformed more than the  wealthiest people i mean poor people in  saudi arabia have shoes made in  factories now they have water from a tap  they have electricity like things  you take for granted in a western first  world country well those those  technologies they arrived in saudi  arabia late and they arrived suddenly  you know saudi arabia did not have  electricity when benjamin franklin was  performing his experiments with  electricity in philadelphia they did not  participate in the very first  um you know mass deployment of plumbing  when that was going on in places like  edinburgh and london you know the early  adopters the innovators of what's now  you know modern sanitation modern  plumbing technology this stuff arrived  there later and they they discovered and  harnessed  the wealth of oil under the ground quite  late it is commonly said that if the  british had known how much oil was in  saudi arabia that the british empire  would have never ended the british would  not have given it up  it's a  purely hypothetical statement  it may be uh anachronistic in various  ways um and you guys may not know this  but before the oil  the oil reserves in saudi arabia and  iraq were known  um many people and certainly people in  the british empire and the french empire  they assumed that myanmar was going to  be economically a much a much more  important country than it was because  myanmar had known oil reserves where  where oil was known to be is very  different from where it actually is  today the amount of oil in myanmar is  not considered very significant but  we've gone on to discover and exploit  oil and all these other places all  around the world  um so for a brief time  it was presumed that saudi arabia would  be locked in poverty forever as this  desert wasteland and then  all of a sudden  everything starts to change  religion didn't change  the optimism of the 18th century has  proven to be totally utterly false  right  saudi arabia didn't change it didn't  adapt the church didn't now i have a  great question okay how about  switzerland  no switzerland is a relatively positive  example of a democracy in so many ways  if you compare switzerland to saudi  arabia hands up who who would rather  spend the rest of their lives in  switzerland and who would rather spend  the rest of their lives in saudi arabia  there's no beach food let me tell you  if you're in switzerland once in a while  you might think you'd rather be in yemen  because of the beach you know i hear  good things about the beach in yemen  snorkeling  um  i met a guy who worked for the tourism  department of yemen believe it or not he  told me a lot about how wonderful yemen  was in some ways  i also hear bad things about young  anyway  i've known a few different yemenis in my  life just people i cross paths doesn't  talk to a remarkable country in so many  ways um  yeah switzerland is a positive example  of a western democracy the quality of  education  the level of direct democracy  participatory democracy the institutions  of uh how laws are actually voted on and  debated we can say we can say some  positive things about switzerland okay  how much has religion progressed in  switzerland so whether you can look at  switzerland as a one of the optimal  examples of modernization of technology  obviously it's what's in the country  switzerland is kind of where everyone  has access to drinking water and  electricity on the internet and you can  look at saudi arabia at the opposite  extreme but what do they have  in common they both remain  intensely  religious nations both of them in so  many ways have failed to emerge from the  darkness  of the dark ages and the  you know  the  technology  of how  government itself is organized the  development of modern bureaucracy right  this is also you could say it's either  failed to uh challenge religion or it  has made religion more powerful that we  now live in a world where increasingly  the organization of church resembles the  organization of state uh in france in  switzerland in germany you you basically  have modern tax collection supporting  churches of um i remember talking to a  woman with a phd  about how she was paying her  contributions to the church in germany  and so on and this it is now resembles a  modern uh collection of taxes and uh  indeed so i know there are ongoing  controversies in england about the  extent to which um the anglican church  should now have a fully modern uh  you know parliamentary style bureaucracy  given that they do not have church the  separation of church and state given  that for them you know the church is  explicitly a branch of the government  and for example the government is put  upon to pay for the pensions to pay for  the retirement benefits and medical  benefits of all the employees of the  anglican church  um  so the bureaucratization of religion  which i assume has also been ongoing in  saudi arabia to be honest i have not  read anything about that side of it  but the modernization of religion may  only be making it worse and not better  okay um  yeah so there's also a mention here that  switzerland only had equal rights for  women in 1990.  as i recall that happened uh  principality by principality and  switzerland so that's why it's so late  so the last few  districts that didn't have the equal  right to vote for women caught up in  1990 but it's not that the whole country  didn't have women's rights in 1990 as a  correct me if i'm wrong but as i recall  that's why uh in that sense switzerland  lagged behind they didn't have full  rights for women everywhere in the  country because they believed in this  principle of local democracy of letting  local  debates and votes happen in each in each  tiny uh principality costing the whole  okay  so look you have all seen the title of  this video  now you tell me guys this is your  opportunity to be part of the content of  this video  what is  the future of atheism are we just  supposed to shrug our shoulders and  carry on  with the assumption that oh yeah there  was this brief period where atheism was  on the news and had best-selling books  best-selling books written by complete  idiots like sam harris  and now if you don't think sam harris is  an idiot we have 24 people in the  audience right now  you can just tell me you can just look  in the mirror you can tell me do you  personally feel that you are stupider  than sam harris i doubt it i think  everybody here i think everybody who  watches this video  i think all of you when you look in the  mirror late at night when you when you  evaluate your untouched i think you  actually do count yourself as more  intelligent than sam harris so at a  minimum the guy is a mediocre or some  mediocre intellect um but if if not if  you don't share my view that he's  actually a complete imbecile  okay people like  sam harris had smash hit  best-selling books about atheism right  and they appeared on the radio and they  appeared on tv and those debates and  that energy spilled out here onto  youtube okay  and a lot of money flowed into atheism  too there were a lot of donations right  and a lot of that money went to people  like jacqueline glenn  that's the truth right a lot of that  support went to supporting people who  really shouldn't have been supported and  didn't do anything positive with it you  can take a look at what jacqueline glenn  does today on youtube what she's done  over the last 10 years  in aggregate you know  um  but i mean my fundamental question is to  ask  what next  what now so there was that brief moment  that came and went  all this money flowed in all this  attention all this interest flowed in  but  two big failures one there was a failure  to create institutions  now this is my opinion some of you may  disagree with me some of you might say  oh no the church of satan in california  is accomplishing really great things i  know there were some  institutions created by that period of  interest in atheism if you guys don't  know there's this uh i forget the  technical name might be the satanic  temple i'm sorry i might be getting the  name slightly wrong but there's this  group of so-called satanists in  california who go around starting  amusing  legal objections to reinforce separation  of church and state so to give an  example there was a courthouse in  america that had a display of the ten  commandments in front of the courthouse  this is on government property  now many countries in the world england  france germany many countries don't  enforce separatist christian state at  all so if there's a religious monument  like this on a courthouse's steps on  government property whether you have no  legal leverage but the excuse made for  this  uh judeo-christian display was that it  would be acceptable because they would  be open to all religions applying and  having their own statute having their  own  monuments so  so the activists from the church of  satan and their real objective is to  promote atheism they sent in this  hilarious artist's concept of you know  baphomet of this form of satan with goat  horns  uh directly influencing children  sitting on a throne it was baphomet and  the throne being kind of worshipped by  two children and they're like oh well  this is our traditional satanic statue  that you know uh you know we want to  have parallel to we want to have it next  to the statue to moses and the ten  commandments and this shows you know  vote this you know  in a subtle way hilarious uh satirical  statement oh this shows the close  relationship between satan and  children in the next generation and blah  blah blah  and you know as you can imagine the  local city council or whoever it was if  it was the city government the state  government they suddenly decided to  change their tune and just get rid of  the monument to the ten commandments  rather than stand by their word of  opening the door to applicants from from  all religions equally uh to have their  own display okay so there are some  little there are some little examples  like this but i i think it is fair to  say in the united states of america and  kermit i think in all of europe i think  in the whole western world i do not  believe anywhere on earth certain by the  way certainly not in israel talk about a  country where you need a really strong  atheist political movement show me the  atheist movement in israel i do not  think that anywhere in the western world  there is  even one  atheist organization as powerful and  substantive as people for the ethical  treatment of animals peta so what peta  is to animal rights i do not think there  is an atheist organization at that level  and in case you don't know i hate peta  and i regard pet as a failure i'm a very  harsh critic of peta but like if you  give peta a 5 out of 10 in terms of  success my point is there are no atheist  organizations that even reach that level  of being a 5 out of 10. now i could now  give more  positive examples of organizations that  are closer to an 8 or a 9 out of 10 or  something more successful or civil  society organizations but that's not my  point my point is when we're looking at  atheism past person future we're looking  at institutional failure on such a level  that it's we're nowhere near  the other failure though is more  impalable  it's more immaterial but it is just as  important it is a fog  passing through the 21st century and  that is the lack of will  the lack of spirit  you know i look at my fellow atheists  and we all know  it's easier to have spirit it's easier  to have will it's easier to have  self-confidence when you're just sitting  in front of a camera and you're not say  at the wailing wall in israel you're not  actually on the ground talking to a  rabbi you're not on the ground talking  to a you know traditional christian  church pastor you're not dealing with  muslim fundamentalists face to face  you're not maybe afraid for your life  right oh it's easier to talk tough it's  easier to have spirit it's easier to  have a fierce will when you're on camera  but i'm going to tell you something i  don't even see it on camera you know i  was gonna say the movement has lost its  will but as as is stated in the title  here i feel that there is no movement  but even if you look at the kind of  fragments that could be a movement what  i see instead is a lot of self-hatred  self-deception yes also  self-indulgence yes fame whoring yes  people just you know pursuing their own  monetary success however we want to put  it  but um  you know i have made videos saying  seriously and sincerely i want to see  churches pulled down  i'm not a status quo philosopher here  i'm not a status quo  player in politics look at the school  system in quebec look at the school  system in france look at this look at  the school system in saudi arabia look  at wherever whatever example you want to  use do you believe that the future  is muslims  putting their children into madrasas  into muslim religious schools so they  have a muslim upbringing so that the  science textbook that teaches them about  evolution is written by a muslim cleric  for true believing muslims that's their  science education it's going to a  madrassa's going to a muslim school look  again it doesn't exist in the world but  we could say this about tibetan buddhism  you know hypothetically would you want  tibetan children being raised by tibetan  monks in a traditional tibetan education  you know like we can talk about this  hypothetically to some extent  you know there are some buddhist  countries where at least orphans  do kind of get a buddhist they're raised  by a buddhist temple you can talk about  that very very small number of children  now their only education is going to a  buddhist temple um  i mean i knew about sorry i was  interested in this as a research  interest for me i knew about cases in  myanmar where there were orphans and it  was you know i mean the good news was  they weren't starving there were orphans  who were taken care of by buddhist monks  it was that was a situation of absolute  poverty so you know they were getting  food and shelter but no no educational  but that's in a country where a lot of  people get no education at all so i just  say this is not really up i'm just  mentioning you you can at least talk  about a hypothetical example with  buddhism this way my point being it's  not just the judeo-christian religions  but if the judeo-christian religions are  a large percentage of the world's  population the largest percentage of the  earth's service okay gee so um we've all  agreed that some kind of change is  necessary what is necessary mean does  necessary mean it'd be nice if someone  else did it and you don't have to do it  be nice if someone else took  responsibility but you don't want to  take responsibility what does necessary  mean okay hmm yeah gee it's really a bad  idea that in canada  muslim children the children of muslim  parents should be sent to be educated in  muslim only schools well it's happening  right now  how about the christians  how about the hutterites so if you don't  know who the hutterites are they're an  especially despicable christian group do  you think that hutterites should go to  school only with other hutterites do you  think that catholics should go to school  only with other catholics do you think  that sex education and evolution should  be taught in the catholic schools  whatever example  you want to you want to use right  oh oh gee and you know when you watch  star trek or you watch star wars  is that what the future is like you know  like guys you know i'm a bit of a  pessimist for technological change i  think that  most of what we use in terms of consumer  technology invisibly is limited by the  laws of physics i'll give you guys a  real brief example it's very easy to  fantasize that in the future  the uh the battery inside your cell  phone will have 10 times as much or 100  times as much  energy as the battery does today okay  well if you don't know this it's not  that it's outright impossible to  increase the amount of energy but once  you increase the amount of energy and  obviously you have to change the  materials then you're getting into  something that is tremendously hot to  the touch see there are other  constraints you're getting this one  that's a liquid rather than a solid and  there are there are some special  batteries that are like a vat of  looks like lava there's a valve of  liquid metal that's carrying all these  electrons you get into constraints about  what's possible so the laws of physics  in that sense limit  how much technological progress or  change is possible and the other thing  is the limits of our biology okay  um  at a reasonable size like the size of  the computer screen i'm looking at now  you cannot see  the difference between 2k video and 4k  video so we can keep improving the  density of the image on a on a computer  screen or a movie screen you can  but you can't behold it we're past the  point of diminishing returns in terms of  the difference technology can make  by the way just brief that question it's  true if the image is enormous enough if  you're having a screen the size of a  wall you have a huge screen in your  living room then you can see the  difference between 2k and 4k whether or  not it's worth thousands of dollars is  another question i don't feel it is but  whatever i have i have monastic tastes  in case you haven't noticed  know  uh  there are these two great constraints  about the difference you know technology  can make in our lives now  really briefly there is another sense in  which technology is not constrained  right and that's the technology of war  killing people is going to get easier  and easier  it's going to get faster and faster  already if you guys don't know this it's  terrifying when you look into it there  are laser-based weapons that anyone can  acquire like terrorists can acquire as  well as governments and smugglers i know  have made use of this there are  laser-based weapons that instantly fire  a pulse of laser that's invisible you  don't see it in the light and it  permanently destroys your vision so it  also causes intense pain and to normally  get something like bleeding from the  eyes but in one moment you have a pulse  of light i believe it's outside of the  optical spectrum and it destroys the  vision of anyone who's looking in that  direction and has their eyes open  instantly so you can wipe out you know  like in a battlefield situation you can  wipe out soldiers in an urban situation  you can wipe out people in the city and  i read in detail about a case where  there were smugglers  or whatever illegal  uh  an illegal shipment on a boat of some  kind  and um they were being approached by a  helicopter from something like a coast  guard some kind of a police authority of  this kind  and in order to escape they fired one of  these lasers that almost killed the  pilot and co-pilot because if you're  blinded  you know  again this is permanent this lifelong  injury but in that moment  your ability to land the helicopter if  you've been blind or continue flying  without dying is terrible now  this development can continue the  further perfection of nuclear arms the  further profession of drones uh  automated aircraft now  one of the reasons for that why i'm  saying that can really continue to  progress is exactly that it's not  constrained by biology in the way that  the the 4k screen is the quality of the  screen you can make for a computer or  for a cinema you know it's constrained  by our ability to appreciate it our  ability to behold it right we're talking  about the technology used to kill people  there's no such thing because obviously  this is something that goes far beyond  our biological limits right you're  exactly talking about overwhelming the  human body in different ways so our  ability no no so likewise by the way so  this is an imperfect comparison but it's  an instructive one  how much  can aspirin be improved technologically  so aspirin has been around for about a  hundred years alexa in what year was  aspirin discovered  here's something i found on the internet  in 1897 felix hoffman invented acetyl  salicylic acid alexa stop  hundred years  more than 100 years  so you know  this is similar to saying about the  battery in your phone like it's not it's  not that you couldn't have more energy  in that com in a compact place but once  you're exceeding the limits of the laws  of physics as we have them here you're  getting into other trade-offs other  disadvantages like okay if you want more  energy in the same amount of space in  your phone  then  differences in temperature differences  in the consistency solid versus liquid  you're starting to get into and by the  way differences in reliability you know  how often are you willing to put up with  them exploding or catching flames you  know  currently it's one in a million but what  if it's 10 in a million what if it's  just you know what if they blow up just  a little bit more often you know because  cell phone batteries do blow up on small  case  um they are an imperfect technology as  it as it stands okay all right you want  a pill  that can relieve your headache  why are we still using a technology  that's over 100 years old  there are trade-offs okay we have  invented pills that will relieve your  headache more rapidly  and they're addictive  and they have side effects okay there  are a whole lot of chemicals we've  developed that that will have a pleasing  effect on you and will alleviate your  headache  and we don't really want them being sold  over the counter the way we sell  aspirin right there are trade-offs like  you can have a more powerful battery but  are you sure you want that when you know  the disadvantages you can have a more  powerful pill to relieve your neck pain  or your headache or whatever it is these  kinds of things are you sure you want so  we're stuck with a hundred year old  technology for headaches and fever in  the pill that's asking okay but when  you're taking away that biological  constraint when you're talking about  making a gas that can kill people we're  talking about biological and chemical  weapons there's no limit  right that stuff can all get much  deadlier and in case you didn't know we  have just been living through what is  ostensibly the first global pandemic  caused by a laboratory accident you know  the first that we know of  is it possible that other  global pandemics epidemics and diseases  were in fact  developed in laboratories and released  accidentally or intentionally i have  read accounts from the soviet union  where in russia they were making  biological and chemical weapons that  were accidentally released from the lab  but their impacts were just localized  there were like a couple villages in  russia and so we were basically everyone  died and it's horrifying and you know  soviet union they had control of all the  newspapers so they were able to present  it to the public in a certain kind of  way but you know that's it's not totally  unprecedented in that sense right  okay  so you know so there are some forms of  technological progress  people that are going to continue to  increase exponentially  alexa in what year was the toilet  invented  here's something i found on the web  according to vizio.com the first  flushing toilet was invented in 1596 by  sir john harrington  1596 okay well all right that's okay  that's not thomas crapper's toilet  okay well somebody made an early model  back in the 16th century but anyway look  we're definitely at more than 100 years  okay let's look it up  year thomas crapper  invented the toilet  yeah getting a laugh out of melissa  thomas crapper  [Music]  thomas crapper's water closet looks  around 1880 this gets rolling  my grandmother still used an owl house  in the 1920s yep  well that's just what i was going to  talk about right now so look my own  engagement with ecology went through  various phases you know  there's one way you can look at ecology  and be optimistic about what we're going  to invent something better than this  toilet we've had for 150 years let's say  roughly  a tech like moving forward with  technologies and then the other way you  can look at it is going backward so you  know melissa was mentioning her her  mother had an outhouse i used to live in  cambodia did you know this about me  that's probably the first time i've ever  mentioned it i've probably never been i  used to live in cambodia i used to live  in laos i have some experience with  other kinds of toilets and before i ever  went out to cambodian laos there were  some ecologists who were  really optimistic about the so-called  the sawdust toilet about returning to a  non-flushing um compost based toilet you  know these these kinds of things exist  right okay well i've got something i'm a  complete pessimist in this respect all  right i think technology is going to  continue to give us more addictive video  games it's going to continue to give us  more addictive street drugs  do you think fentanyl is going to be the  final invention this way do you think  there's not something coming next after  fentanyl no  you think oxycontin and oxycodone are  the end  of the development of addictive  painkillers right after i'm okay so what  originally there was heroin  then there was uh  uh what's the  god look at my name  sorry we had a series of opiates you had  heroin you had oxycontin oxycodone now  you've got fentanyl what's next  all right you think it's going to get  better then it's going to get worse i  think we're going to forget how to make  addictive chemicals right there's more  addictive stuff is coming you know we  invented lsd we invented uh what people  call ecstasy mdma we invented these  what's next you know and these things  are going to keep  progressing destructive drugs  are going to keep progressing i'm a real  pessimist when you talk about things  that are actually useful things that are  actually going to improve you know human  life i think we're very limited by the  ways oh have you been reading the news  lately have you heard this have you  heard this there is no cure for the  common cold  there is never going to be a cure for  the common cold  there is never going to be a cure for  herpes simplex which i think is like the  most widely transmitted disease on  planet earth if not it's in like the top  five it's never going to be a cure for  the gum cold in case you didn't know  in case you didn't know  the common cold one of the most common  forms is called coronavirus  we've we've been coming up against the  limits of our ability scientifically to  create vaccines for coronaviruses which  include the common cold like there are  some limits we're up against here right  but in terms of the destructive  potential of technology oh look guys we  can use this in all kinds of different  examples um our technology our ability  to cut down trees is getting better and  better our ability to grow trees  how much do you think that's going to  improve how much do you think our  ability to create forests as opposed to  ability to destroy ports and in the last  two centuries you see all that progress  oh we can get faster at cutting down  trees we can't get faster growing them  right  um  you know there is more technological  change to come and some of it is so  [ __ ] obvious i keep saying this in  the videos about steroids and i say it  also in the videos talking about  antidepressants like look i mean the the  public addiction to drugs like haldol  that don't work drugs like prozac that  don't work that's one problem but you  know what else is creeping up on us is  the addiction to performance enhancing  drugs including even testosterone  testosterone works  it's much more threatening it's a  mind-altering drug as well as a body  alternate drug okay do you think that's  the end of the pro you think what's next  you know we invented anavar we invented  sarms right we invented this whole  variety of performance dancing drugs and  various ways of transfusing more  testosterone into people okay  you think that's the end of that  development and you think if we don't  prepare for this culturally  intellectually philosophically do you  think we're going to be better prepared  or worse prepared for the next wave of  mind-altering body altering  habit-forming performance enhancing  drugs because they do they have a  certain kind of height of them even  testosterone itself does by the way it  boosts you up right  um what we were so well prepared for  fentanyl right like our culture having  been through the experience with heroin  addiction and oxycodone addiction oh we  were really prepared to deal with  fentanyl addiction right are you  prepared for what comes next  culturally legally  like as a democracy organ are you ready  are you ready for what comes next think  about how we dealt with any of these  things  religion  you know  our cure for drug addiction is people  going to find jesus that's the only  [ __ ] cure we've got and like in  thailand it's people going to a buddhist  monastery which i think works better i  mean there's a question let's compare  the efficacy of people uh  people you know converting to  christianity versus converting to  buddhism devoting themselves the  buddhist devotion versus christian  devotion uh vis-a-vis sobriety and drug  addiction but but look it's all [ __ ]  i mean buddhism is also built on oh yeah  right this is this book i've wanted to  read this book for years if if my  ex-wife were watching that shooting i  wanted to buy this and i was too poor i  wanted to buy this years and years ago  well maybe she wouldn't remember but  when i was with maxwell i finally bought  it coming i still don't have to still  enough time to uh to read it  um probably cause i'm busy writing my  own book  i'm trying to get the final manuscript  but you know we are still as a society  limping along on this crutch relying on  christian charity and guess what it says  in the bible it says why was wine put on  this earth if not to make men happy you  know what  the bible isn't pro-sobriety it's not  you know what i mean it's not and you  know a lot of a lot of devout christians  smoke marijuana and drink alcohol and uh  you know and  so on and so forth all right i'm gonna  take a moment now to to look at your to  read your comments it looks like there's  some some uh  uh some intelligent comments here maybe  i'm wrong it was all stupidity  babe if you want to jump in sorry my  girlfriend melissa is off camera she she  also counts as a member of the audience  but i normally if you wanted to you  could you could type your comments i  mean if you wanted to  instead of giving  has seen the title them i actually have  not seen the title of your video all  right there you go  let's look it up  the title of the video is atheism is  dead colon  of the future of a movement that isn't  moving  yeah  okay so it does look like there's some  intelligent comments here  yeah i really appreciate what you said  about something being necessary but does  that mean that you don't have to do  anything right if it's necessary then it  means you have to do something personal  but once it gets to the point where  people actually have to do something or  refuse to do something right  they fold they don't do it well you may  not know but that's part of the reason  why marxists are so lazy  is that marxists believe that their  future utopia is inevitable uh it's the  doctrine of historical inevitability  yeah no no but in their utopia but  that's you know that's the future  history that will no matter what so why  not just smoke marijuana why not just  you know why not just feel morally  superior to others and sit on your ass  and live a comfortable life why get out  on the vanguard and actually risk your  neck or do something daring or positive  so yeah it's actually interesting that's  a source of passivity even for a a kind  of secular religion or godless religion  like marxism and communism now  nevertheless there are some communists  who are who have quite a work ethic  shall we say  um  you know uh for whatever reason noel  keane says quote i would love you to do  a talk or debate with sam harris would  you agree to it if you were to agree so  noel i don't know if you are connected i  don't know if you were a big donor who  can push sam harris around but it is  incredibly unlikely that sam harris  would ever talk to me it is incredibly  likely that sam harris would acknowledge  my existence and i do think i remember  seeing some people on reddit saying that  they were quite sure that sam harris had  seen my videos  um and they they knew this on the basis  of so i don't know if sam harris uses  discord or just his twitter or something  but they they said look you know  normally a video like this that's  reached just a few thousand views  criticizing he does see those like they  heard him mention enough like obscure  youtube videos that and again that's  possibly because his fans sent him the  link it's possible because he googles  his own name like you know however i'm  not faulting him for that uh it is quite  likely and based on what his fans told  me it was just people who had really  been following him they were like oh no  no he'll be aware of this guy's critique  of him by now he will have heard this uh  back when i made a series of videos  criticizing him so obviously that's not  gonna happen all right so henry gann  says quote  the god whole exists he has god whole in  quotation marks what do you replace  religion with okay henry i think that is  a profoundly  misleading question  okay  um  male circumcision  exists  what do you replace  circumcision with there is no workplace  there is no substitution all right  millions and millions of men will just  not have 60 of the nerve endings in  their penis cut off okay female  circumcision  exists what are you gonna replace it  with there is no replacement there's  nothing like what do you what do you  think you think people are walking  around mourning the fact they didn't  undergo female circumcision like oh  there's just this emptiness in my life  there's something i'm lacking there's a  hole you know i know this this  god-shaped whole concept because they  didn't undergo circumcision okay  arranged marriage exists do you think  people are going to be walking around  feeling they lack something they lack  religion because they don't have  arranged marriage all right and  look you know  i don't know anyone who isn't busy you  know i i just don't believe  there are people who are going to be  walking around saying they have nothing  to do on sunday  if there was no more church service i  just don't believe it you know in none  of these senses it's it's not credible  to me so what i'm saying to you is you  may want to discuss this further if  you're still in the audience you can say  further it's one thing to say you don't  believe in god it's another thing to say  you don't believe in the god-shaped  whole i don't believe that the deletion  of god leaves anything lacking that  people i don't believe it  um  yeah and now  again  if you actually go and see these people  face to face or you sit in the classroom  it might be different for you  if you actually go to a mormon school  if you actually go to a muslim madrasa  you know do you think these children  will be impoverished or their lives will  be worse if instead they're integrated  into a government secular school i don't  believe it and so where i grew up in  toronto there were  jewish orthodox schools there were  muslim-only schools there were  catholic-only schools i just do not  believe there's a god-shaped hole in  people's lives if they give that up and  then are integrated into a you know  what do you think they've lost  oh they've lost out on  homophobia they've lost they've missed  out on being told uh that you know  evolution is just a theory you know what  i mean like all this all this horseshit  they get laden down with in their youth  by going to religious school they've  lost out on guilt and all this you know  they've lost out on prayer or being  taught to pray before they they write a  test and [ __ ] like this before they do a  sports competition i i just don't buy it  so i'm sorry anyway thanks for the  donation someone just uh chipped in uh  10 pounds guys we have 32 people in the  audience if you guys want to hit thumbs  up this is saturday so most of my  followers are out getting drunk or  something  um i do have a smaller audience on  weekends than than weekdays but if you  guys want to hit thumbs up it'll help  people this more people discover the  video both while we're live and uh and  after do you ever understand that  i think the promise of eternal life is  something yes  okay so again i i have to put on a human  skill i have to put on a face to face  scale i don't believe that  i don't believe that  um  i you know  i i don't think now if you talk to  someone who used to have that delusion i  mean look  first i'll do something with there's a  human face on it  talk to someone who used to sit by their  bed and pray  and they genuinely believed that there  was a supernatural person who heard  their prayer and who responded and maybe  they even heard the voice of god  talking to them and then they hit a  point in their life where they don't  believe in that anymore the same way  you know you don't believe in santa  claus anymore  and where they look back on that with  scorn and derision and really see it as  something quite dangerous you know  uh hearing the voice of god or speaking  to god i don't believe there is a hole  in people's lives when they stop talking  to god when they stop listening to god  or hearing the voice of god i don't  believe it i don't believe there's any  sense of which they're poorer  or they feel there's something they need  to replace with i do not buy it  now look sorry i'll come back to your  example in a second  but  all right i knew a lot of first nations  people first nations american indian  korea ojibwe mohawk these these types of  people den  you know so these are the native tribes  most of them had some history of  ambivalent engagement with the  traditional religion  of their tribe right and some sense of  sort of national pride in that religion  the non-christian animist religion okay  even for them and this is very different  from talking about christianity because  we're not really talking about an  oppressive religion in the same way all  right i don't think any of them could  say that they felt their lives were  worse when they stopped being afraid of  ghosts when they stop being afraid of  curses when they stop being afraid of  miscellaneous magical  superstitious things that their  grandmothers believed in stereotypically  again each one of these people has a  different story some of them their  grandmother was a communist whatever  each family was different but if they  were kind of typical family where the  grandmother really had these traditions  of believing in sacred and superstitious  and invisible things and then as the  next generations go there's less and  less  patience for that increasingly the old  religion is just regarded as literature  in the same way you and i regard  shakespeare there's nothing supernatural  about it just like you value culturally  or participate in without belief you  know no i i don't buy it  now  you know the promise of life after death  eternal okay and of course it's a  promise that's  false  comes at a price  you can't have sex at a wedlock  you can't have sex for marriage  i i don't even have to give you ten  other examples  i mean you know of course there's this  long look at uh abby shapiro ben  shapiro's sister her whole [ __ ] life  is trying to keep this checklist she's  trying to maintain every principle in  the old testament and some of them she  doesn't even try  i don't see her doing animal sacrifice i  don't see her you know  if you actually get into the list of  what rituals are required of you you  know every meal  begins and ends with prayers and  superstitions and candles and how the  food is prepared and how it's served  there are a million things  but she ostensibly so the only thing she  has going for is that people think she's  beautiful she either actually is a  beautiful woman or a woman or people  perceive her as a beautiful woman she's  a much celebrated beauty  jesus have you heard her sing terrible  taste she's an imbecile and just  unbelievably poor taste in everything  but art music etc she trained to be an  opera singer  it's torture to listen to that woman  saying but people perceive her as  beautiful people perceive her as sexy  she's had sex with one man  that's all she's ever had  it's not even if we just stick on the  sexuality you know in reality so every  element of her life is infested with  superstition and ritual  just for that promise of  eternal life and  but even if we just looked at the issue  of sexuality of that sacrifice i  don't buy it  i don't buy that that's a hole  in your life that you're left hankering  for you know after  after you lose it  you know and that's what we're talking  about we're talking about a before and  after that now you live without the  belief in the soul you live without the  belief in reincarnation or heaven or  hell or whatever it may be you know  so uh noel says quote it was reading sam  harris and dawkins that deprogrammed him  from religion  so he does have respect for their work  close quote so noel i gotta say this for  those of you who've been watching my  channel you will have heard me say this  10 years ago so sorry eight years ago a  long long time ago okay no  people driving down the road  see a car crash  and they think i'm gonna quit drinking  don't have respect for the car crash  okay  real example i've known people who said  this i'm not deeply personally okay  you're driving on the road  and you see a slaughterhouse  most often people just see the cows  lined up to be slaughtered they don't  actually see the slaughter right i've  also heard stories of people saw a train  crash or a truck turnover truck that was  full of pigs or something and the  animals some of them are killed and some  were running around  scared they see that they think okay i'm  gonna become vegan i'm not gonna eat me  anymore you know okay don't respect  the car crash don't respect the  slaughterhouse okay  i know it's kind of unnatural for human  beings  but do not make a god  out of the impetus that led you to make  that decision to make that breakthrough  to have that will  uh there's a parable of the stone robe  monk  in buddhism  okay  and that is a monk who was cold  and so instead of lighting a fire he got  a heavy stone got some kind of boulder  and he would lift the stone and he would  walk back and forth in his cell in his  monastic  hut  so naturally he became one of the most  muscular and impressive monks amongst  the buddhist monks because this was his  method of heating himself was instead of  using a instead of using a  fire to use a stone okay it's not the  stone it's the man that matters okay  it's not sam harris it's not dawkins  it's not the book and  if you don't believe me if you go back  today and read those books i think you  will laugh at them with scorn  all right and you look at it and think  this is just a stone  i am reading through your comments now  guys just catching up with what you said  over the last hour or so  so the compliment from uh alexandru  perrida  for donated 10 pounds sterling was quote  i found your channel a few months ago  you have an interesting approach to life  why are so many atheists using  intoxicants shouldn't they be purely  logical and reasonable in theory  so look you know um  [Music]  it's much harder to be a vegan than it  is to be an atheist  veganism requires a certain level of  commitment to self-discipline  and of strong will you can't be a  pushover i mean just even the ease with  which you can go to restaurants and bars  and you know enjoy yourself in society  everything surrounding you is made of  meat and cheese and eggs  just the availability of processed food  the convenience of eating non-vegan food  you know if you're a vegan  you have this level of self-discipline  where you say no i'm not going to do  what's easy  i'm not gonna do what's expedient i'm  gonna do what's right you know  even if it pisses off my boss at work  even if it pisses off my co-workers  even pisses off my mom and dad you know  um  you know  you have that commitment you have that  self-discipline that's what you've  decided to do it's what you want you're  going to do it what percentage of vegans  are silver  huge percentage of vegans drink alcohol  huge percentage of vegan smoke marijuana  huge percent of vegans use even harder  mind-altering drugs like uh ayahuasca  [Music]  what's called ecstasy mdma  you know i don't i i don't want to know  the percentage you know like sober  vegans  are a shockingly small minority of  vegans you know so that this is the  reality of the world we live in  now you know what percentage of vegans  are addicted to video games you can get  into some other categories it's what  percentage vegans are atheists as  opposed to holding uh superstitious or  supernatural views you know so that is a  much much higher barrier to entry now  what is the barrier to entry  to becoming an atheist it's almost  nothing  like i would a very large percentage of  people who call themselves an atheist  they just don't care you know you can be  by the way i'm not against this people  would say well you know my grandmother  believed in that stuff and my parents  kind of tried to make me look bad you  know i just decided it just doesn't do  anything to me  it's not really a philosophical or  political commitment for them but just  like yeah you know it's  it's not appealing to them they're not  enthusiastic about it well that's all it  is it's a passive  rejection of religion with no clear  commitment to transforming society you  know  uh now you know i'd say this also  um  [Music]  if you live in switzerland  being pro-democracy  you can be a completely gormless  conformist it can just be you're someone  who goes with the flow of society as it  already exists living in denmark being  someone who's pro-democracy in some kind  of challenge right  living in beijing china  you are risking your life by being  pro-democracy even if all you do is talk  about it  all right it's really even if all you do  not even on the internet even if you are  just verbally open with your friends  about what your views under marcia you  just talk about the fact that you think  china should have elections  you're risking your life okay really  you'll be tracked and you'll be spoken  to you know the government will sooner  or later have a word with you to let you  know you know that that's what you're  doing you're risking being imprisoned uh  so on and so forth now  likewise  today  uh in denmark  actually i think the ultimate example  probably sweden sweden and norway these  are some of the most atheistic sweden  norway and i looked at everything the  czech republic these are some of the  most atheistic countries in the world  you are risking nothing by rejecting  religion or calling yourself an atheist  okay in texas you're risking something  you know there's risk there's negative  consequence in saudi arabia you're  risking something in malaysia  you're you're risking something right  you're you're to some extent putting  your life on the line you're risking  really negative  uh consequences  but you know with all that having been  noted  um  [Music]  okay look  okay  here's what an idiot would say and now  here's what i have to say  an idiot would say well there's no  intelligence test  before you  get your atheist card there's no iq test  there's no exam  to get in okay here's what i have to say  i've been to oxford university england  i've been to cambridge university  england and there is an intelligence  test to get in people have to study for  and write a whole series of exams to get  into oxford  and cambridge and they're all idiots  every single person i met  who either had a phd from oxford and  cambridge or was in the process of  getting a phd phd candidates elite level  students at oxford and cambridge i'm not  telling you  some of them are stupid i'm telling you  all of them  are stupid and some of them are a  combination of stupid and insane but  people who were really [ __ ] crazy any  of you there could be some people  watching this who knew me in those days  some of those guys went on to become  professionals yeah i'm saying you are a  [ __ ] [ __ ] you and you and you all  you guys i knew face to face one of  those guys he's now a professor here at  uh  uh university of british columbia i  think you're [ __ ] [ __ ] bro i  think you're that stupid you know for  real  okay so you know  like i'm just saying when you see it in  this context  when you see it in the context of even  when there is an intelligence test even  when there is an exam to write the vast  majority of people in elite educational  institutes are imbeciles okay  well yeah there's no entrance exam for  becoming an atheist there's no entrance  to example so you know there's no  example becoming a vegan either you know  uh it's it's a really really tough  comparison to me now look you guys might  know me i signed up to join the army  i did not end up doing military service  for stupid circumstances but just a  couple years ago when the war was  against isis i signed up to to fight  i i don't know  every guy i've met who's been in the  army yes they like to complain that they  had to work with stupid people in the  army okay but i i really i really don't  know i doubt it i think if you're in the  army if you're an active service i don't  think you work with stupider people than  you meet in vegan activism or animal  rights activism or atheism activism and  i don't think you work with stupider  people than you meet in  cambridge university england on campus i  don't believe that  and i'll tell you why because it's about  self-discipline  now i'm not saying there are no stupid  people near me  i'm saying like the level of stupidity  that's normal stupidity and malice  that's normal in these supposedly elite  settings right i think everyone wants to  everyone has a if you haven't you  haven't really dealt with the  face-to-face you know you want to  imagine that these places are full of  intelligent  well-intentioned people what why do you  think i signed up to do humanitarian  work in cambodia and laos i thought i  was going to be working with wonderful  people imagine the intelligent  well-intentioned people you're going to  meet doing humanitarian work in cambodia  unless  it's not who i'm at okay  so look that's the answer to your  question  and and the next question is what now  what next so what are we going to do in  the next 20 years yeah you know what  i have just one friend who's really gone  to atheist conferences these atheist  activists i only have one  but i remember talking to her i was  talking about problems amongst  so-called atheist activists and she was  just agreeing with me and she said look  when you go to those conferences  a lot of the people there are getting  drunk and sleeping with prostitutes a  lot of them are like these people who  had some kind of repressive christian  upbringing  and now they want to use drugs use  alcohol sleep with prostitutes have the  pleasures of the senses the pleasures of  the flesh  that were denied before like that's real  and you see it face to face  you know  okay so so so  a lot of atheists are drunks a lot of  atheists are drug acts a lot of atheists  are  hormones use a real 18th century term  oh there's a famous quotation you don't  have to tell the whole story behind us  where a man is accused of being a  hormone  and he defends himself by saying if you  go into a man's house and finds that he  owns only a single piece of cheese i do  not think you could very well call him a  cheese monger therefore i do not think  you can call me a whoremonger because i  have only one more  it's hilarious  terms of the terms of the bizarre  history of that term yeah okay so a lot  of atheists are  whoremongers they're overcome by the  pleasures this is okay what now  what next  what are we gonna do  you know and i mean that's what all my  critiques come come down to you know  again whether we're talking about  something like the vegan movement we're  talking about ecology i mean right now  you [ __ ] tell me what just happened  in glasgow scotland what did extinction  rebellion and anaerobic animal rebellion  and all these donation collecting  parasites on the ecological movement  accomplish  in the last two weeks they well it's  about a month last four weeks really  right  they were all featured on the news they  were all given all the support a level  of support my youtube channel has never  had is never going to have right all  this encouragement support the world's  most popular cause and they accomplished  nothing and there's no indication they  are ever going to accomplish there's no  positive direction forward they're  taking or ever gonna take okay well what  now what next i mean i'm i'm sitting  here saying again the title of this  video  i'm saying to you you know the the  atheist movement is a failure um you  know the atheist movement is dead and  now i'm asking you what is the future of  the movement going to be and it's going  to be what you and you and you  decide to do with it after watching this  video all of these things all this  initiative it comes from unique  individuals  small numbers of unique individuals  that's who will make the difference  around the world  um  and you know if if not you then who look  just put this in perspective  do you think  you are less talented than jacqueline  glenn do you think you are less talented  than a nissian he originally came on the  scene as an atheist activist if you guys  cameras a long time ago  do you think you are less intelligent  than sam harris if if you say yes i  don't believe you i don't think anyone  in this audience some people haven't  seen this video yet i don't think any  one of you believes you're stupider than  sam harris and if if you don't know what  i'm talking about watch my playlist of  videos i have a playlist of the videos  criticizing sam harris that will show  you just how stupid that guy is where i  quote him and show what's wrong with his  way of reasoning and things okay  guys you know every single one of you  has more potential to make this change  to lead some aspect of this movement and  change the world than sam harris or  jacqueline glenn what the [ __ ] did  jaclyn glenn start off with you know  think about her starting position 10  years ago you know what i mean  every single one of you in this respect  in relation to and what does it take  again  there is risk you know it does take  nerve it does take backbone you know  there are some it does take  steadfastness you know but look at the  losers who've been leading the movement  in the last 20 years now look at the  next 20 years and think about what's  think about what's possible you know  um again sorry i mean let's already do  attention to it it's easy to say that  something is necessary it's even easier  to say it's inevitable and i'm saying  look ahead to the next 20 years and you  tell me what what difference we're going  to make  you know what's inevitable  [ __ ] isis  all right i mean the islam and that can  happen again  there's no reason to think that's the  last time muslims are going to try to  re-inaugurate the caliphate to go back  in time and start caliphate-based  government again  have you heard the taliban is the  government of afghanistan again things  can go backward anytime bro look at  turkey  turkey the one distinguishing thing  about turkey was so-called camalism  whatever you want to call it but the  secular modernizing movement in turkey  well you know what's happened in the  last 20 years in turkey look at israel  you think israel is going to go forward  it's going to go backward oh yeah israel  could become more secular and more  democratic but it could not  could get worse you know how about how  about texas you know any part of texas  georgia you know you tell me again i've  drawn attention to this in many videos  people like to praise so-called blm  black lives matter when you look at the  reality on the ground of what's  happening there is no black lives matter  what there are black church groups  almost all of the activism almost all  the legal cases the actual leaders the  actual organizations making things  happen were black christian religious  groups uh i didn't hear about any that  were muslim just the last couple years  obviously if you go back to the 1960s  there have been times when muslim black  muslim groups were also a major source  of of activism and  you know  agitating for social and political  change so you know  there is nothing inevitable about the  movement forward towards atheism moving  forward towards democracy right it's  gonna happen if people like you and me  make it happen now look sorry this is  this is an aside but it's probably the  single most important part of this video  um  there are two moments in history  where secularism could have taken over  the government of a major western  democracy and changed history forever  one was the french revolution and one  was the american revolution okay and in  both cases it didn't happen  okay  why didn't it happen in france because  one man  named napoleon decided to sell out the  atheist sell out the secularists and to  reestablish catholicism in france one  man made that decision period  there's nothing democracy there was no  you want to say that yeah there was  something that i had wanted to say but  then i forgot  so i was just gonna say we  in america growing up in america i lived  in a country that was supposedly had  separation of church and state right  right but anytime something some tragedy  happened all the news reporting would  say yes  prayers  you know yes god be with us you know  that is sorry no no the extent of which  religion is just ingrained in the public  discourse  it does really depend on one person it  depends on sure  editorial policy at that time  the president in case you didn't know  took his vows on a stack of bibles  every courtroom in the united states  every president  there are religious ceremonies every day  that they they start congress house of  congress both of the state level and the  federal level they have prayers they  have religious ceremonies and invoking  god and there were polls of americans  saying huge percentage of americans one  second but saying they would never vote  for someone who was an atheist you know  thus we get completely phony christians  like uh  bill clinton you know pretending anyway  you did you did unfortunately derail  what i was saying remember what i was  where i was  right okay so look uh  napoleon was one man and he  single-handedly completely sold out and  undermined and undercut and reversed the  movement towards atheism that was  decisively created and briefly pursued  by the french revolution so if you don't  know  that involved taking away the land owned  by the church the land and the buildings  owned by the church yes like including  things like monasteries those including  things like farms you know actually  taking that away and saying you don't  own that anymore and in some cases they  were just auctioned off to the highest  bidder in other cases they were made  into hospitals or something the  government needed i think in some cases  there were many military facilities too  because there was a lot of war at that  time but actually  taking away  the possessions the wealth of the church  and even though it was only for a few  years they coercively forced priests and  nuns to get married  they said no that's over  you now have to be married and have to  be a normal merced you are not allowed  to live in celibacy  now they didn't actually force them to  marry a particular person you can  imagine but there were it's like well if  you're a priest you can marry one of  these nuns there was a kind of dating  game that went over there was a  government sponsored dating game of  coercively for they were actually trying  to eradicate their religion okay one man  sold it out  now you tell me what were you bunch of  men  that's what i was going yeah that's  they're saying next okay do you think  benjamin franklin believed in god i  don't i've read his autobiography he's  polite about it but i think it is fair  to say benjamin franklin was basically  an atheist okay  and if you don't know you can look into  his  sex life okay how about thomas jefferson  certainly in today's parlance thomas  jefferson would be considered an atheist  i think at his own time you might have  described him as some kind of deist  having some kind of nuanced  anti-clerical views but yeah  um  i notice  we have  32 thumbs up oh it's changing we have 32  thumbs up with 31 people in the audience  so  some some people gave the thumbs up and  left we have more thumbs up but guys if  you just joined the audience uh hit  thumbs up it'll help more people  discover the video okay so look  obviously we could list off all of the  people who participated in the america  how about governor morris how about all  these like all these people were kind of  on the atheist spectrum there will be  some exceptions by the way sorry i can't  say everybody who was a an elite level  leader in the american revolution around  the american constitution was was an  atheist i know you you tell me do you  think john adams actually believed in  god holy [ __ ] what a weird guy john  adams was  um  okay so there was this moment in history  where a group of secular  republican people who were of varying  degrees of atheism took over the  government and wrote their own  constitution and you know i mean the  main missed opportunity people like to  talk about has to do with slavery like  well you guys were all kind of sort of  opposed to slavery but you weren't  really opposed to slavery enough to  make a commitment at that moment when  you were the constitution well they were  all kind of sort of opposed to  christianity but they weren't opposed  enough to to make it happen so instead  you know look at what we got  you know with with the united states of  america and by the way you can repeat  that for each of the 13 colonies i mean  you know i think the most secular group  of legislators was the group of  legislators who  um  you know who actually wrote the  constitution at the federal level  but state by state some will be more  secular than others but no america  people behave as if they have separation  nutrition state if you actually read the  constitution  it's a whole other story  uh looks right i'm just going to say i'm  sorry this is the recurring leap motif  let me do the video okay  what now what next okay guess what  nobody made it easy on you nobody did  this for you okay napoleon didn't make  it easy for you charles the goal didn't  make it easy for you okay benjamin  franklin didn't make it easy for you  okay it's our struggle now in the next  20 years we've got to make it happen now  and you tell me if not now then when  this is 2021.  we're still locked in the [ __ ] dark  ages we are still dealing with this  medieval [ __ ] people are still  shocked atheists are shocked when i say  i want to abolish christmas  okay they're shocked  they can't even debate or discuss it  with me not one ever has they reject me  as an extremist atheists are shocked  when i talk about actually shutting down  religious schools actually coercively  ending religious education actually  coercively integrating people like the  mennonites people like the amish people  like the hutterites and yes crazy muslim  groups orthodox jewish groups so on down  the line saying oh no no i actually  don't believe those people should be  allowed to brainwash their children and  i don't believe they should be able to  circumcise their children male or female  i also know that they should be allowed  to tattoo their faces for [ __ ] sake  okay oh i'm an extremist so that's where  we're at in terms of the overton window  in terms of what's considered mainstream  i'm way outside the mainstream because  i'm willing to say out loud these things  that are so obvious that they're written  into every [ __ ] science fiction  vision of the future of planet earth  we've got right there is no science  fiction that views it the other way  somebody mentioned dune several people  mentioned dune right but dune is a  future dystopia okay dune is a future  where there is no democracy dune is a  future where basically the muslims won  were basically you know muslim jihadists  rule the whole universe and it's  horrible and in case you know in the  first two novels they also got rid of  computers where drug addicted muslim  fundamentalists took over the universe  people who are addicted to this you know  mind-altering hallucinogenic drugs spice  and they're crazy fun that's that's the  view of the world in dune and in case  you don't know it's just a few senses  here and there i've heard interviews the  author where any possibility of  democracy is completely dismissed it's  just a world where the only form of  government is despotism that's it  there's only despotism nothing else and  everyone's ruled by this crazy religion  and  you get to see the consequences so i  mean it is a it is a dark hopeless  future that way okay it's interesting  counter example whatever you can talk  about but you know i'm just pointing out  all of our visions of the future you  know generally speaking  i don't know johnny mnemonic even get  into this kind of thing any anybody they  do not show you a future that's  dominated by religions okay now who's  gonna make it happen  and i'm just be honest i think when  the founders of the american  constitution when people like uh  benjamin franklin were in the  constitution they assumed  they assumed there would be this  tremendous progress in religion i i  would not go so far to say they assumed  we would have an atheist society but  they had lived through about a century  and a half since the english civil war  where they'd seen tremendous innovation  diversity and change in religion just  that 150 years leading up to the uh  american revolution  i think they thought there was going to  be more progress you know that that just  as the puritans were very different from  the catholicism of the dark ages and the  puritans were a very diverse and  fractious bunch you know that things  were going to keep on innovating and no  that's not what happened you had a  period of innovation and then that  ossified and it became an authoritarian  patriarchal religion that continues to  this day  you know we still have so the mennonites  haven't changed guys they haven't  changed none of those are the you know  sorry the the amish haven't changed  and you know to a shocking extent we  haven't changed  oh sorry there are some comments here  i'm not reading because i just agree  with them oliver says oliver has his own  youtube channel by the way oliver d  shields if you want to go check out his  youtube channel i promote it here pretty  frequently uh quote there is just so  much to do to exterpate religious  notions especially those that have a  connection with  uh medieval religion  you know  the thing is too right  the nature of this work is  if you talk to someone who was raised in  an orthodox religious context until  they're 20 years old it's a lot of work  to deprogram them right like you have  someone whether it's islam judaism  christian what have you you know someone  who went to a madrasa someone was raised  you know you know  being inculcated with religion then  they're 20 years old and they step into  the light of day and they're blinking  and looking around trying to face up to  the reality of martin luther that's hard  and by the way that goes on with trying  to deprogram terroristic program  fundamentalists you know because some  people they go a certain ways down the  road to fundamentalism and terrorism and  extremism and someone has to try to  educate them no look this is how life on  earth works  guess what you are a monkey we all are  okay guess what you know  um and it's very hard to deal with but  the flip side of that is when people  just grow up without that again this is  why i don't believe there is a  god-shaped hole to fill when people just  grow up without that [ __ ]  all this stuff is a five-minute  conversation two-minute conversation oh  yeah in the past people used to cut part  of their dick off people used to cut  part of their penis off  for really incoherent reasons in the old  testament it's never even really  explained in the old testament but you  know it symbolically represented the  deal made between abraham and god  you know you are not going to have a  problem  talking someone out of circumcision who  was born and raised atheists and you're  going to have a huge problem when you  have a civilization of millions of  people who are willing to fight and die  to protect their right to engage in  circumcision and they're still willing  to fight and die over the headscarf in  order to conceal women's hair in public  that is those are fighting words those  are those people so you know i'm just  saying like there's this in terms of  when you're looking at the generational  change you know when are we gonna when  we're gonna make this difference the  reality is uh europe and america they're  becoming more and more muslim not less  and less so primarily through  immigration but to some extent through  conversion and to a large extent through  the delusion of multiculturalism  that we're enriching our society by  making it more muslim no we make we  enrich our society by making it less  christian you know bringing in foreign  cultures was only useful and positive in  as much as it challenged our overly  comfortable assumptions about our own  religious tradition like having more  chinese people move into your community  is good if it  creates atheism if it makes you look at  your own cultural traditions and think  wow this is crap then it's that it's  positive you know  if if 10 million chinese people  immigrated to afghanistan that could  improve afghanistan because it would  make it less muslim and probably result  in a lot of muslims reflect and again it  doesn't have to be chinese could be 10  million japanese people or something  people from a more modern more secular  more atheistic society and a society  that has radically different cultural  traditions oh gee you guys do this moon  cake festival huh well  that's kind of stupid but arbitrations  are stupid too things could change right  but it's not because more superstition  is good it's not because more religion  or more diversity of religion is good  multiculturalism is only good in as much  as it eliminates the host culture and  the host culture is you know based on  superstitious nonsense uh from the dark  ages  catching up with your comments guys  so guys sorry i i appreciate you you're  saying these comments all right because  i'm going to give you my real so so i  don't know if you're still on it some of  these come from a long time ago a guy  named matt made this comment matt  and gional so i'm just going to  highlight you in case you're still there  i'm going to reply to your comment now  matt um  you mentioned some other youtuber  podcaster and i think i've seen this  name before  and you say oh he's currently doing lots  of interviews okay  matt  nobody is going to help me  nobody  okay  not jacqueline glenn  not onision  not richard dawkins  nobody get it through your [ __ ] skull  i'm on this microphone alone  for a [ __ ] reason  okay you think i wanted this format you  think i wouldn't rather have a round  table you think i wouldn't rather have a  show like the young turks with 20 people  collaborating cooperating you think when  i started doing youtube i expected to be  working alone no matt  nobody  is going to help me  not even you  all right so whatever let's see you  mentioned this [ __ ] podcast or  youtube or whatever you think is going  to help me out no matt  no  either you are or [ __ ] nobody is  going to do it and [ __ ] you for taking  your duty your obligation your  opportunity and putting it up on this on  this guy john  okay and if any of you said the same  thing i mean it's ridiculous nobody  would say it nobody would say oh hey you  can do a podcast with richard dawkins or  you could do a podcast with jacqueline  nobody is going to say that in this  audience the people i have are too at  too high a level of very edition and  cynicism to suggest this thing but i  will say the same thing to you i'll say  oh no oh no what about you what about  your podcast what about your political  organization what about why didn't you  why haven't you incorporated a charity  why haven't you created an activist  organization whatever it's going to be  why don't you create the atheist  equivalent to the ymca  where the [ __ ] is that  where is a militant atheist nihilist  anti-religious organization that has a  gym i can go to  and where you say no [ __ ] the ymca [ __ ]  christianity we are the opposite of the  ymca right where i was in toronto there  was a jewish competitor to the ymca and  it was from the old days back you know  the all these institutions they all used  to be anti-semitic they always do  anti-semitic and they'll use to be  racist you know it makes sense if you  have a catholic organization it's only  for catholics you have a christian  organization you know like you know i  don't i don't really begrudge them being  anti-semitic it excludes jews because it  says christian on the side that's all it  is but from the old days you know in  toronto there was a jewish country and i  forget it wasn't called the young jewish  associate but it was a jewish health  club  with a gym  okay and i was like a little kid when i  was learning about this and i remember  thinking this through and like at first  you think oh wow that's great so like  judaism is challenging christianity no  it's not  it's bad and evil and wrong i don't want  to live in a world where in one city in  downtown toronto  there's a jewish gym and a christian gym  and a muslim gym and a hindu gym and a  chinese gym i don't want to live in a  society based on religious bigotry  okay do you that sound good to you  you know oh how  what's the [ __ ] improvement compared  to black versus white segregation i  don't want to live in a world built on  religious integration no i want to live  in a world where atheists get organized  where nihilistic atheists get organized  and they're really willing to [ __ ]  live by their values and say no we are  the gym that's not going to put up  christmas decorations and it's not going  to [ __ ] food about we're going to  openly say we exist to destroy  christianity we don't want to live in  the dark ages anymore this is a gym for  people who don't live in the dark ages  i'm just being real with you i don't  think that exists anywhere in the  [ __ ] world  all right i don't i don't think it  exists in los angeles i don't think it  exists in the czech republic i don't  think it exists in sweden  okay i think the nearest you're going to  find there was uh there was a group of  positivists the followers of augusta  compt who briefly tried to do that and  fizzled out like 20 years uh this is a  century ago there was a positivist group  that tried to challenge religion that  would be having this kind of  anti-religious  organization that was illegally it was a  religion unto itself and the only thing  you're going to find are going to be  some of the communist and socialist  organizations which i'm also opposed to  i'm an anti-communist and i'm an  anti-socialist but you know maybe you  can find this okay so i'm just saying  you know  [ __ ] you  nobody is going to do this [ __ ] for you  napoleon didn't do it for you benjamin  franklin didn't do it for you but also  these other [ __ ] social media  influencers aren't going to do it for  you you know and and guys  you think it's easy for me  so how long have i been on youtube is it  eight years now it's approximately eight  years i've been on youtube do you think  i ever [ __ ] imagined i'd be sitting  here alone after eight years all right  so i live in a small city a hundred  thousand people in this city okay i am  not bragging i'm one of the most famous  people in this city okay it's a small  city i don't have a lot of competition i  really don't who is a more famous  youtuber from victoria canada  this city than me okay and now within a  given category i think i am the most  famous atheist youtuber from victoria i  mean look sorry i may be the most famous  author like author of books on the most  famous political author the most famous  person writing books about politics  inventory if i have any competition  it'll be because somebody retired here  we have a lot of elderly people like it  could be someone who's successful and  they're retired right like it's what do  you want me to [ __ ] say it's a small  town full of [ __ ] losers with no  ambition okay i'm the most famous vegan  here i'm the most famous like there are  some things okay yeah what i've created  here is a crossroads and i've been in  and out of this town for [ __ ] eight  years and i've been at the university so  on do you think i ever imagined i'd be  isolated this way you don't think it was  reasonable for you to imagine i would  meet ambitious people on the university  campus who would want to do podcasts  with me you want to do roundtable  discussions or want to do videos or want  to get organized or want to create a  foundation even just stick with that  example create an alternative to the  ymca  create the atheist institution everyone  okay bro it doesn't exist  it has never happened for me it is never  going to happen for me and it's partly  your fault it's people like you  right you guys remember a couple months  ago i made the video talking about  global warming and this same kind of  thing came up where at some point i've  got to point the finger on my audience  and say look guys not even one of you is  going to send me an email trying to get  organized trying to get involved trying  to talk to me about something positive  you want to do no but no nobody's  actually going to do jack [ __ ] you're  going to listen to this video while  you're where you're [ __ ] washing the  dishes you're going to put the dishes  away you're going to say oh that was a  good video and you're going to go back  to your life of [ __ ]  i don't know cocaine and blow jobs  whatever the [ __ ] you're into man you're  all gonna go back to watching  uh touch football on tv what the [ __ ]  you're into i don't know  um you know that that is the reality  okay so look you know i know look i know  i know how reassuring would be dude when  i first started this channel  so it was getting back to a narrative  loop that started over an hour ago when  i first started this channel i just  separated from my wife i was alone i had  more time and the whole atheist  subcategory on youtube was kind of  popping there's a lot of interest a lot  of activity okay i  phoned up and i emailed and i got in  touch with back then people used  facebook groups of like facebook  messaging for a special page i got in  touch with  the atheist podcast the atheist radio  shows some of them were literally on  radio but a lot of them were like a  radio show that was broadcast on youtube  and as a pocket i got in touch with  those guys partly because i said look  i have a background as a scholar of  buddhism i wasn't just a normal buddhist  i was a scholar of buddhism and now i'm  an ex-buddhist and i want to talk about  loss of faith and religion in relation  to buddhism and like many schools i was  able to write them and say look i see  you've done 300 episodes of your show  you've never had one talking about  buddhism they've like all been about  christianity or like ninety percent of  them are christianity and five percent  of judaism and five percent of islam or  some of that you know what i mean so i  was writing in saying look i can really  offer something valuable can i collab  with you can i do an interview with you  okay  not even  one positive response  ever all right you guys know i did a  series of videos and there's going to be  more because there's no november i've  done a series of videos talking about  abolishing christmas and replacing  christmas with something better creating  new holidays new literature new poetry  new children's fables to challenge the  culture of christmas i have not had  one positive response not one interview  invitation to collab any at any level  from any other social media influencer  any other author of books anything any  publisher i've been talking about  publishing books for years do you think  one [ __ ] person attached to any  publisher anywhere in the world has ever  gotten touched me positively whether  about atheism veganism children's story  books like all these projects  think about one person ever cooperating  with me or supporting me not one so  homie i am alone on this mic for a  [ __ ] reason okay talent is scarce  i'll say this guys i don't need the  money  but i think you should support me on  patreon i think you should  precisely for this reason precisely  because it is so [ __ ] scarce if i  were you  i would get on patreon and support a  bellatio just for that reason because  hey look around  jacqueline glenn where is she now  make a [ __ ] long list of examples  where is she now what do you think she's  going to do in the next five years  nothing oh hey this is one guy who's  hungry this is one guy who's ambitious  and i don't know  what he's going to do in the next five  years okay that alone is a [ __ ]  reason for you to support me on patreon  your five bucks probably will not make  any [ __ ] difference to me okay but  i'm just being real with you i if i were  in the audience i would want to support  me and you know and if you're supporting  jacqueline  any of these [ __ ] guys  where do you think your money is going  when you support sam harris when you pay  for his [ __ ] guided meditation  podcast when you donate money to support  him doing a long-form  monologue about his hallucinatory  experiences using mind-altering drugs  using magic mushrooms lsd this kind of  what do you think you're [ __ ]  supporting when you support saint mary's  what do you think sam harris can  accomplish in the next five years  okay  jack  [ __ ] all right i just say this if any of  you are connected to a publisher just  that just something as simple as that do  you know a publisher who would handle  dissident literature who would publish  my works on politics do you know a  publisher who published my work  children's story books  i had this story book about socrates  it's a replacement for christmas fables  they're fables about socrates  illustrated poems for children i have a  storybook about veganism or whatever but  i mean some of my stuff is you know  saleable in that sense that some of my  stuff is really disturbing hard-hitting  uh political commentary and analysis you  you [ __ ] tell me guys all right and  look  do you want me to make another bet the  last time we did this when i did the  live stream on on global warming i said  not one person is going to write to me  about this and instead i'm only going to  get email from people who want to have  sex with me or want to talk to me about  my sex i want to gossip about my sex  life  what would you you think i lost that  [ __ ] bed what you know  okay so uh  there are some other interesting  comments here carl grimes says quote i  think isil is at a disadvantage here in  that he wasn't raised religious  um the experience most ex-christians  have is that of having a whole  god-shaped point of something something  lacking carl so i i disagree because i  think i grew up with  all the disadvantages of judaism  all the disadvantages of christianity  all the disadvantages of watching  mainstream television you know reading  batman comic books all that mainstream  uh  cultural stuff  plus  communism  you know i was raised by devout  extremist communists but you know  communism doesn't exclude christianity  and judaism the majority of communists  continue to have uh religious views and  religious rituals and so on and i grew  up with uh baruch and i i grew up with  hebrew prayer and the hebrew god and i  have all those disadvantages so no i'm  carl like i totally understand them  tonight why assume that about me no  um it's just that you know me in a time  of my life where i'm atheist i'm openly  nihilistic and i'm mad as hell so you  don't get that vibe from me but i  understand it all i understand it all  too well  um  you know i look if i'm wrong i'm wrong  right i mean like if i if i'm wrong  what a wonderful [ __ ] world we'd live  in but i think all of you are here  you don't really believe i'm wrong like  does anyone believe these problems just  gonna go away by themselves you know um  yeah so comment from rasmus um i  mentioned sinnoh an hour ago or  something people who pray and actually  hear the voice of god in response to  their prayer and he says quote it's  funny how biased psychiatry is because  hearing a voice would be considered  schizophrenia or schizophrenic disorder  unless it's the judeo-christian god  unless it's in this context of prayer  yeah well take a look at research on  [ __ ] buddhist meditation  all the stuff that's all the  transcendental experiences uh reported  from buddhist and modern hindu  meditation all of that stuff would be  considered insanity but it has this  religious context and so people even  praise it as if it's science as if it's  a  therapeutic form of scientifically valid  experience a valid praxis  okay i guess i guess i didn't realize  just how many comments i've got here to  catch up with  thanks thanks to you guys for for  contributing the conversation thanks for  the thumbs up we know 46 people in the  audience have 40 48 thumbs up i mean  one of the reasons why i appreciate the  thumbs up is that i just say you know i  am aware that i am a minority within a  minority within a minority here i'm  aware that my  views  um  are unpopular amongst atheists  my views about veganism are unpopular  amongst vegans like i get that so when i  when i say i appreciate you guys giving  me the thumbs up it's because i really  think that is and you know if you know  someone to share the link with share the  link i think there's no point  you know sharing the link with people  who don't want to hear it but if you  have a friend where you know oh hey my  friend james he's going to appreciate  this or something by all means you know  uh  okay so uh guys there were a lot of  interesting comments i appreciate i was  i was afraid i have nothing so i thought  this would be a 30 minute live stream  carl grimes says quote one assumption  isil has is that talent is of primary  importance whereas he thinks time and  place is what allows people to change  the world tal so this is this is carl  speaking not me carl says talent is ever  present the opportunity for change is  not  voltaire  why and how did voltaire change the  world  i've i've read voltaire's first book  which is not have none of his books are  well written  no it's talent that's scarce  it's talent that changes the world you  know [ __ ] carl now carl so i don't  know how old you are but  i assume you're  i assume you're older than 20. okay if  you look back at the last 20 years  we've had everything we needed to change  the world everything we've had the  opportunity of a century but i want to  say the opportunity of a millennium okay  there's nothing like and we've had tools  at our disposal to get organized and  meet like-minded people including  youtube here we've had these amazing  opportunities the last 20 years i mean  the the difficulty of printing and  sharing a pamphlet in the 18th century  that's how voltaire's ideas spread  people would physically print pamphlets  and share them in coffee shops in coffee  houses in paris that was how information  had to travel you know it was crazy and  live theater you'd write a script and  perform it live and take it on the road  like it was unbelievably hard work to  spread ideas okay no we've had every  opportunity in the last 20 years we  could have changed life in america we  could could have changed life in europe  we could have changed life in  afghanistan  okay and we didn't  all right now you want to get into  communist china it's even more  depressing look at the opportunity um  presumably no okay carl i i the topic of  today's discussion is even more telling  there is no time  for atheism there is no place  for atheism okay there is no  adventitious opportunity for atheism all  right exactly what scarce is is talent  you know  um  [Music]  you know sorry when when do you think  there's going to be a better opportunity  to spread atheism in afghanistan  when do you think there's going to be a  better opportunity to spread atheism in  central asia  when do you think there's going to be a  better opportunity to spread atheism in  syria  okay how about north africa you know we  can extend this to the area generally  speaking where the so-called  uh oh [ __ ] i forget the name of the  uprisings now uh the 2011 uh uprisings  took place  um the arab spring that's what they call  it so-called arab spring uprising okay  when oh really do you think there's ever  been a better time than the last 20  years to promote atheism in egypt  any of these examples you know libya  libya i think you're gonna get a better  chance really okay but but being honest  united states of america i mean again we  saw that briefly whatever 2015 or  something uh maybe 2013 on youtube we  saw the way in which just the existence  of internet technology could amplify and  share and energize atheism as a movement  and why did it stop  why didn't it go further like you can  look at what happened in atheism from  the year 2000 to the year 2012. let's  say right so sam harris has a hit book  all this stuff the four horsemen oprah  winfrey features okay maybe i'm lying i  actually don't know if hopefully feature  those books i shouldn't say that but  anyway mainstream television new york  times bestseller list  uh richard dawkins and all that explodes  around this time you know  the da vinci codes is a hit pokemon  there's a particular you know you know  why didn't it go further okay  my answer is precisely lack of talent  okay yeah and sure that apply i could  now get into an analysis of what  happened in buddhism okay you what do  you think's going to be better in the  next 20 years that was lacking in the  last 20 years so you know you're damn  right what scarce is exactly uh talent  okay so i'm interesting another comment  from saying that carl grimes says quote  the fact that religion is a cultural  universal should tell you something  about how fundamental it is to the human  experience  okay carl  how about murder  is murder universal  how about tooth decay  how about rape  how about  war  how about  holding animals in captivity and killing  them to eat their flesh or to eat their  eggs  like  do you know how weak the argument is  that something is universal  you know how about revenge you know what  i mean  um  and let me just give you the world's  simplest counter argument you say  religion  is a cultural universal that's  universally true of all cultures in  plain english  okay  i think that the struggle of atheism  against religion  is a cultural universal  i don't think there's any counter  argument to that it has occurred in all  cultures at all times including within  islam  so you know murder has always existed  and the opposition to murder is  rape has always existed the opposition  of rape is always tooth decay has always  existed and dentistry and the opposition  to tooth decay at least for the last  century has existed it's a relatively  recent discovery yeah we live with with  the balances okay and tell me something  if you go to iran today  who are the atheists  all right do you think they're the  stupidest people  okay i think they're the best people  i think the people in iran today who are  atheists  they are either the people who are the  most brilliant or the people who are  just the most strong willed  right go back in time one century two  centuries three centuries same question  same answer okay so i'm asking you which  side are you on  now i don't know where you even learned  this language of talking about cultural  universals facts that are universal  about all cultures okay slavery existed  in all cultures  until we eradicated it  all right  gender inequality i mean as a very vague  term  but women not having the right to vote  women not having the right to work  without their husband  owning and controlling them like a slave  was universal to all cultures take a  look at the status of women in 15th  century china 15th century western  europe 15th century arabia 15th century  india  15th century south america  okay so you can say oppression of women  i mean it's a little bit vague but  gathering together many phenomena into  one you know and it's and really it's  we're talking about there are people who  will tell you seriously that the status  of women in china was worse than it was  under islam at that time because things  like breaking their feet you know um the  broken feet of women being foot you know  it's  yeah it's difficult i know i'm using  more clear terms most people haven't  heard of foot binding let's just use the  academic term foot binding by breaking  breaking women's feet with a metal rod  and folding them over and forcing them  into bandages so they grow in this  deformed state there were some really  uniquely terrible things with the status  of women in pre-modern china oh okay  what happened we made it [ __ ] illegal  we made foot binding illegal china made  opium illegal at least 25  of the adult population of china had  become opium addicts okay they had a 25  addiction rate okay and they made it  illegal and today a tiny percentage of  the chinese are addicted to opium it's  not even one percent there's a trace  number of people how many people in  china have broken feet foot binding zero  okay oh gee how much slavery is there in  the united states of america today so  what the [ __ ] do you think it means what  the [ __ ] does it mean in your mind when  you say something is a cultural  universal guess what we can overcome  tooth decay [ __ ] we can overcome  slavery  you know we can go from having a society  where rape is the norm where it's  universal where virtually every  good-looking woman has lived through  being raped repeatedly to being  something incredibly marginal and rare  in society something extraordinary you  know do i think we can ever totally  eliminate it i i don't even think we can  totally eliminate slavery i mean slavery  i think will never be zero on planet  earth but it can go from being the  predominant system of social  organization to being something  you know incredibly rare okay and that  is what can happen to religion too  right and it's gonna be coercive sure  it's partly gonna happen through public  education and outreach through  enlightenment if you want to use those  those terms you know  but um sure it's partly going to be  coercive and that's what was true with  china getting rid of opium and china  getting rid of foot binding and a lot of  these a lot of these things a lot of  these transformations  you know but i just say  when you say something is fundamental to  the human experience what does that mean  to you because it doesn't mean the same  thing to me all right when i was a child  i thought about revenge  like  eight years old like i'm being real with  you already at age 11 revenge didn't  really make sense to me anymore but like  seven years old eight years old revenge  you know that makes sense to a child  i've always said communism i think is  really appealing to children and people  who are have childish ways of thinking  you know okay  like you know  i'm in my 40s now  nothing could seem more laughable or  contemptible  than revenge the desire for revenge that  revenge be be gratified there are some  cultures that still have the vendetta  the belief in revenge afghanistan is one  of them they're they're very powerful  vendetta culture revenge culture you  know and sometimes this is glossed as  honor killing in muslim culture and  there are cultures where the the  consensus opinion of mature adults is  that revenge is something really very  childish and contemptible that or  something medieval something to be  looked down upon okay  change is possible all right and that  has come about through coercion i mean  it has come about through  real legal and government change not  just through education or or cultural  change of eradicating the culture of one  man challenging another to a duel and so  on of of honor killings vendettas and  revenge and so you know  but you know when you say something is  fundamental to the human experience i do  not know why or how in your mind that  that justifies anything at all  but that that must mean to you something  it doesn't mean to me  um you know like  stupidity  is fundamental to the human experience  but you can overcome it ignorance is  fundamental to the human experience you  can overcome it if you are telling me  that people talking to their imaginary  friend  is fundamental team experience people  taking a lamb  and strapping it down to an altar and  cutting its throat  so the blood spurts and flows  and seeing that they're killing the lamb  so that their imaginary friend will do a  favor for them if you're saying that's  fundamental to human experience it  doesn't just exist in ancient judaism  and thus carries on in some forms  judaism christianity and islam today  ancient china look at animal sacrifice  in ancient china ancient india too  although they're less comfortable with  it okay  ancient india did you know this hinduism  had a ritual of raping a horse  okay the celts in europe had something  not really similar but they also had a  ritualized form of raping horse  you think that's fundamental to the  human experience we talked about human  sacrifice before that existed in tibet  it existed in in mesoamerica what are  you saying is fundamental to the human  experience ignorance is fundamental to  human experience stupidity  is fundamental to the human experience  you can get over it you know i was seven  years old once i was eight years old  once i got over it  you know most i never believed in  talking to my imaginary friend i never  did a lot of people did a lot of people  small children had that kind of  experience or that kind of imagination  okay you get over it  you know what  i'm sorry like you know when you look at  when you look at rapists or something  too  i think you know part of their problem  is that they have a fundamentally  childish and irresponsible view of the  world you know they're not sophisticated  enough intellectually to realize hey i  don't want to live in a society that's  full of rapists you know what i mean  like like  this is something you know damaging and  hurtful and evil and the short-term  thinking you know they personally may  feel this desire and want to gratify it  but like there are these sophisticated  adult reasons not to do this right you  know so i'm sorry but you know  anything you're going to say is  fundamental to human experience anything  you say that's going to you know you're  going to say that's universal the  cultures right  it's just stupidity  now  sorry but again in case you guys don't  know i am vegan  wearing leather is universal to the  human experience it's universal to all  cultures okay  think about this okay  hercules killed a lion  and he used his sword to cut off its  skin to pull out its organs once you  visualize yourself doing that pulling  the organs out of the corpse of a lion  and cutting away the muscle tissue and  the sinew and you take out the rib cage  and you take out the the spine okay and  he made  the lion's skin  into a cape  and he made its its head into a hat  do you think he looked cool  can you imagine a dorky little kid going  around wearing a [ __ ] the skull  of a of a lion like a taxidermist's  preserved  lion skull on its head and a k oh look  at me  you know it's barbaric  it's childish you think he looked tough  do you think it looked oh wow he's he's  he killed a lion that guy any anyone can  kill a lion  anyone with a bow and arrow can kill a  lion or it's not a test of skill or test  of strength  you [ __ ] yeah okay you killed a lion  and then you're you're wearing its skin  over your skin  you know yeah sure that's that's  universal all cultures people used to  think it was cool to kill a cow and then  walk around with its skin  on their body kill a kill a deer  all right  we got over it vegans gonna we're  willing to see as absurd and barbaric  things that other people don't see  the absurdity and barbarism of  all right yeah what you say is universal  to  to human experience with universal level  cultures  so rasmus a welcome back to the crowd i  think i saw you here months and months  ago but it's been a long time since i  seen erasmus uh erasmus a says quote  atheism has nothing to do with certainty  it's simply not subscribing to any  religious beliefs um  so he's basically talking about being  agnostic as opposed to being a gnostic  atheist um  okay erasmus  so i have two things to say to you  one is  descriptively  this further establishes why it's  so hard to organize atheists to be  positively motivated and form  foundations and change the world they  may have nothing in common  except that they don't care for religion  so it's even less than what you're  describing  they may not even reject the existence  of god they just don't like it they're  just not into it you know like it's a  really low level of rejection they don't  go to church they don't like the song  and dance whatever they may have never  really even thought about it they may  not take any position on these no it's  true so it's hard to form a movement  that's defined negatively  and it's hard to form a movement of  people who have very little in common  positive okay  and the second thing i have to say to  you is so  the [ __ ]  what  how [ __ ] stupid are you to point at  the dictionary definition  of atheism is that going to be the limit  of your ambitions in life like oh well  technically atheists dude how many  million people are gonna have half their  dick cut off this year due to [ __ ]  circumcision oh well when you look up  the definition of atheism it's not  actually opposed to circumcision  that's true and it's shocking to me how  stupid people are i've spoken to  atheists who are pro-circumcision it  blows my mind okay you can talk to  atheists who believe in yoga you can  talk to atheists who believe in  meditation you can talk to atheists who  believe in prayer you can talk to  atheists who still believe in praying to  a higher power that they call the  universe blah blah blah blah okay  [ __ ] you all right dictionary definition  of atheism all you're demonstrating here  is that the word atheism is not remotely  sufficient to describe the ambition to  have a secular society to have a truly  atheistic world right okay so get rid of  the word we can use nihilism you know so  what we can use more words that have  more ambition you know what i'm talking  about in this whole video is actually  destroying the church it's actually  destroying religious education i think  the saddest thing of all about atheism  is really probably called atheist  solipsism which is the attitudes of most  atheists most atheists simply have the  attitude of oh  well it's so it's okay for you to send  your children to a madrasa it's okay for  you to send your children to a catholic  school as long as i personally get to  live my enlightened life as an atheist  this is a kind of solipsism and that  you're treating yourself as the only  thing that matters i know this is not  true  of dictionary definition solipsism or  university chalkboard definition of  solidism but there was a great deal of  fatuous self-indulgence in atheism but  you know like what do you think do you  think the dictionary definition of  atheism is gonna define the remit  limit or you know the the upper  peak  of what your ambitions will reach toward  i'm pointing back to the french  revolution and saying hey that's what  the french revolution accomplished can't  we do better than that  so the other guy who talked about talent  versus opportunity what do you think the  opportunity was  in 1789  that we don't have now in 2021 are you  [ __ ] kidding me do you have any idea  how hard it was to create an atheist  society in 1789 1790 1791 around there  you know it took a few years to get  rolling  do you think they had an advantage they  had a better opportunity a better  situation than we have today you're  [ __ ] dreaming we uh  they couldn't imagine being in an  opportunity as having the opportunities  we have today they were in a situation  where literally you know all of the  neighboring countries were willing to go  to war with them to re-establish the  power of the catholic church it's very  understandable their neighboring  countries included italy in case you  know they were surrounded by pious  christian countries mostly catholics  some some protestant protestant  reformation it's already a factor at  that time you know who were really  willing to snuff out the french  revolution in the name of the the one  true god or the one true church you're  we're not in that situation today  um  okay so i i'll just say this briefly  someone in the audience called little  water  uh little water said quote that he is  mostly agnostic  but humanity makes him an atheist in the  worst of times close quarter okay water  [ __ ] your agnosticism  okay  if i ask you hey you know i i have a son  uh do you think i should circumcise him  yes or no are you agnostic  okay oh i have a son do you think i  should send him to a madrassa to have a  muslim fundamentalist education are you  agnostic  oh hey i'm gonna go on vacation this  year i have three options  i can go to afghanistan saudi arabia or  thailand  where do you think i should go are you  agnostic  oh hey i got bad news for you you have  no choice you either have to spend the  rest of your life in denmark or malaysia  are you agnostic  you're not agnostic you're living a  [ __ ] lie okay you are an atheist the  choices you make in your own life for  yourself and others you're just a lazy  self-centered self-indulgent atheist you  won't commit to true atheism or i may  say nihilism and true atheism is  destructive it's not passive and  self-indulgent it makes you want to  actually go in the world and close down  the madrassas close down the muslim  schools and the catholic schools that  are creating a new generation of  fundamentalists you know sort of that's  that's that's the reality of what  atheism is and i mean you know whether  we talk about male circumcision female  circumcision oh hey a little water so  you say you're just you're just an  agnostic oh okay my next-door neighbors  are devout hindus and they're raising  their daughter to live in celibacy until  she has an arranged marriage  are you agnostic you know how about you  actually participate in any of these  rituals like even the simplest of  magical rituals not even getting into  human sacrifice or animal sacrifice you  know oh do you believe in this do you  believe in this magical ritual but no  you don't  you believe in ghosts you're not  agnostic all right you are a gnostic  atheist or even a gnostic nihilist  because it goes way beyond refusing to  believe in god you don't believe in any  of this stuff do you believe in yetis  do you believe in the abominable snowman  do you believe in bigfoot do you believe  in leprechauns  all right it goes way beyond atheism  your actual position within buddhism we  have all that [ __ ] still we have we have  many magical creatures not just you know  it's it's not based on the existence of  one god you know so that's not the  reality of your position but the  question is what are you willing to  [ __ ] do about it and what i know  about you is you're not even willing to  say that you're an atheist so [ __ ] you  so you're a coward so you're a person  with no backbone or no will or no  self-discipline right or no ambition to  change the world no ambition even take  that risk yourself to stick your neck  out there and say yeah you're an atheist  or yeah you're a nihilist or yeah you  think the world would be better if there  were not catholic schools  where children were educated by nuns  look i just mentioned on that specific  topic a really interesting example is uh  kevin smith you know  kevin smith he was raised by catholic  nuns he did go to catholic school  and he is now an atheist after many  years of being religious so he actually  made films about religion back when he  still believed in religion you know but  i notice even though he is now an  atheist he still has this very strange  fondness for catholic schools and nuns  and catholic institutions still kind of  supports them  you know  and i think that's just because of his  own kind of happy childhood memory that  particular nuns were caring and loving  to him or or what have you it comes up  from from time to time uh so you know i  just say there are people in that kind  of strange conflicted situation i don't  know you little water i don't know this  commenter but i don't think that's you i  don't think you're someone who is  agnostic and is perfectly comfortable  with millions of children being raised  in the catholic  church  system of schools being raised in  schools where they are indoctrinated  with catholic beliefs and only live live  their whole life surrounded by catholic  children and catholic teachers and  catholic nuns where that's the context  they're raised in and that they're told  evolution is only a theory etc where  they're basically however politely given  anti-science anti-religion views and of  course with islam it's worse and there  are various forms of christianity that  are that are worse to get into  particular sex and they're definitely  forms of uh whatever you say  fundamentalist judaism orthodox judaism  that are worse this is a whole spectrum  of views that go way beyond kevin  smith's experience as joe  okay so matt uh  matt angiono says quote if there's an  alternative to religion that offers the  same benefits it's much more likely to  become widespread and get people to drop  the false beliefs  [ __ ]  [ __ ]  so matt  why didn't you open an atheist  alternative to the ymca and again this  is not something that's tacitly or  quietly atheist soon that declares that  it's atheist or declares that it's  nihilist young nihilist association okay  and they got a swimming pool and they  got a gym  if you did  who joins the nihilist gym who joins the  atheist jim people who are already  atheists people are already dialist  nobody  nobody converts to atheism nobody  converts to nihilism  so that they can go to the gym  [ __ ] and i think on some [ __ ]  level you know it all right now the  actual percentage of atheists in the  united states is small alexa what  percentage of americans are atheists  here's something i found on the web  according to speaking tree got in  according to the pew research center  atheists make up a very small portion of  the american population around three  percent alexa stop  uh three percent according to my robot  companion here  um  okay let's let's pretend the pew  research group knows what they're  talking about let's pretend three  percent of americans are atheist what  percentage of famous people on  television are atheist  it's a huge percentage like even for me  growing up  someone like jerry seinfeld is the  representative of judaism you know like  you get the impression that jerry  seinfeld is a normal jewish person not  ben shapiro graham this is true  the type of people who become hollywood  entertainers stand-up comedians news  broadcasters what have you you are  dealing with a much more secular  distorted world  on television the whole world of  celebrities now you're also dealing with  a higher percentage of people who are  drug addicts  different kinds of uh reckless  self-destructive behaviors are also  represented over represent amongst these  kinds of  public figures right  um  do you think anyone  becomes an atheist  because they watched jerry sanford on tv  any do you think anyone becomes an  atheist because they watch beverly hills  90210  you know like so much of mainstream  media is already in effect  militating for  a more secular atheist world i mean  comedy movies whatever you know stand up  comedians i mean  and i think that's because of the  philosophical significance of nihilism i  think a lot of comedy think about what  you're doing as a stand-up comic you're  challenging the status quo from the  perspective of someone who is more  nihilistic than it even if you believe  like chris rock believes in something  but when chris rock talks about  black power movements when chris rock  talks about the black panthers right  he's doing it from a nihilistic  perspective he's doing it from the  perspective of a black guy who thinks  this is all [ __ ] you know what i  mean he's poking fun out of that way in  the same way most of the norms of our  society are challenged in comedy they're  challenged in narrative fiction all  right so  the most exclusive club in the world  that is simultaneously the most promoted  okay what what percentage of people in  porn do you think are atheists  what percentage people making any kind  of erotic  cinema you name it okay  it doesn't work  all right now look you know guys i'm  still down for making a gym a gymnasium  for atheists to go to but i have no  delusion nobody is gonna convert to  atheism because you open the gym you  know and  what drive do human beings have that's  more powerful than sexuality  like so you have a situation where  people can either live in celibacy or  become an atheist and have sex with  anyone they want that's a pretty  powerful reason to become atheist and  three percent of people took that deal  okay so you want to talk about  you just said to me if there's an  alternative to religion that offers the  same benefits are you [ __ ] kidding me  how about the benefit of having gay sex  if you're homosexual  atheism doesn't have to offer the same  benefits as religion we have better  benefits so you're homosexual so you can  live a self-hating life of celibacy or  you can come over to our team become an  atheist and have all the gay sex you  want okay you're a normal vanilla  heterosexual male you can live in misery  and celibacy and have no sex outside of  marriage or you can come over to our  team become an atheist  have all the sex you want  this is not the only example okay no i i  just do not believe you nobody is going  to sign up for atheism or to create a a  better world you know for that reason  and again i don't even believe i  remember reading studies about this in  england i don't believe it's the case  that you get a better quality of  education by going to religious schools  than secular schools even within england  that's what i've seen the studies done  they really say no the quality of the  quality of education is not better not  even an english catholic school or  english you know a protestant school  so you know obviously within canada or  anywhere else in the world you know it's  it's even more extreme  so no you're not missing out it's not  that you have to provide something  but sure you you tell me you guys do you  guys know anywhere in the world you know  atheist  private school system nihilist privately  you know anyone raising money for that  you know we're getting organized to  provide  aggressively militantly atheist  pro-science anti-religion education  um  so someone named raf i assume short for  raphael  says benjamin quote benjamin franklin's  biography does not sound like an atheist  in this way that we understand today  close quote raph i don't think you've  read the book or maybe you read it 20  years ago and you forget um i really  described read it recently no i mean  very clearly  benjamin franklin is an atheist in that  book and again i hate to tell you this  but um  take a look at his sex life  oh  tcat asks a great question he says quote  do you think that a lot of science  fiction that shows extreme progress is  informed by the time and place in  history where the the authors were  writing the science fiction uh for  example the the rapid technological  progress from 1945 to 1975 uh close  quote okay so tcat i think the irony  about science fiction is this  in the year 1920  you could make a lot of money writing  science fiction  fast  so it was actually the technological  limitations of the printing press it's  mind-blowing i was doing some reading  recently but a successful author he was  successful in 1920s 30s 40s  and even when you hear george rr martin  talk about his youth when he was first  writing search i believe his 1960s 1970s  maybe just early 1970s he starts writing  there was money in writing short stories  just short stories that appeared in a  magazine you know  so i think what's ironic about the  history of science fiction  is that we're actually talking about an  art form that was destroyed by  technological progress because today  there is no money in writing at all  and in that sense science fiction has  disappeared no it still exists in  television what have you but you know  you go out you go and pick up a copy of  asimov magazine or whatever you know you  go look at the pulp and paper world and  there's no there's no money in  mainstream journalism there's no money  in the printed the printed word anymore  so yeah there is a sense in which  science fiction was inspired by  uh technological uh progress  but  you know  i also think you know science fiction  was just another way of packaging whimsy  and making a living out of it and you  know so much of science fiction just  relies on magic um  you know john carter hero of mars  instead of mars it could have been he  was traveling to the ancient past and  many of those stories could have been  you know it really wouldn't have been  much different if it were a fairy world  as opposed to another planet um there  are many ways in which science fiction  is not distinguishable from other kinds  of fantasy fable and whimsy uh where you  know like the fact that this takes place  on mars  as opposed to a fairy kingdom or  something or traveling back in time  instead of forward in time it doesn't  fundamentally change that much  i'm still catching up with your comments  guys thanks lots of uh you know  substantive comments here i can't reply  to all of them  it's it's certainly nice to have more  intelligent comments than you can reply  to than  than less  so another interesting comment from  rasmus rasmus says quote that he used to  live in a die-hard religious country  where even saying things like god  doesn't exist would have put his life in  danger that's why he moved to estonia  one of the most secular countries in the  world school so congratulations erasmus  but you know the question is  what now  what next  right like you said look i'm not going  to say estonia is paradise i've never  lived there i had one estonian friend  for like one year of my life wasn't a  long friendship um  he could have stayed in touch with me  maybe he watched the youtube channel  today but he he didn't um  [Music]  so i i just probably if i went to  estonia i would probably still feel it's  too religious it's too christian for my  tape probably but you know with that  have been said if you treat estonia as a  success story how do you take estonia  and push push the border forward so to  speak i don't mean actually conquering  other countries but how do you actually  expand the realm of secular  space on planet earth now you know  hypothetically maybe downtown los  angeles is quite a secular or nihilistic  place  i bet i think if you go there you're  going to be shocked at how many people  are are really religious but you know  even if you were to say that okay so  there's a little bubble of secular  atheist people here maybe in downtown  new york city how do you push that how  do you extend that to include texas and  georgia you know and i'm just being  honest with you rasmus i'm not saying  this to hate on you i don't know anyone  who's asked themselves that question  anywhere in the world no institution  newfound no foundation no broadcaster no  youtube channel  like really there are these dedicated  youtube channels that get a lot of money  that our atheist call-in shows they're  not planning for that they're not trying  to make that happen they're not trying  to take the little nugget of secularism  you've got in los angeles and expanded  to texas or estonia and expanded  elsewhere or the czech republic right  like no one is trying to push forward  in this way to my knowledge anywhere in  the world  so again this is also the sense in which  the the debate about agnosticism is  [ __ ]  you're not agnostic you know this is a  kind of insincere form of agnosticism do  you think the world would be a better  place if you could expand that realm of  sophisticated secular scientific atheism  do you think the better world would be a  better place or do you think the world  would be a better place if the islamic  state expanded if the taliban expanded  right you're not agnostic look at no you  really believe the world is going to be  a worse place if the taliban keep  expanding you know or for that matter if  the catholic church weren't a similar if  the vatican vatican city were expanding  it's not going to happen but you know if  there were an equivalent a christian  fundamentalist realm that was expanding  what you think will be good for the  world is expanding  the scope and depth obviously atheism  you're not agnostic about that so now  what so now what are you going to do to  make it happen what are any of us going  to do to make it happen and i'm sorry  but for so many of us you know the the  true answer is is nothing  we have a funny little joke here from  someone named christoph so kristoff we  got to tell you if you're a real atheist  you've got to change your first name  [Laughter]  kristoff says catholic gyms are the best  carry the cross for 20 miles  i don't think it was it was 20 miles  that jesus carried the cross though  um  alexa for how many miles did jesus carry  the cross it wasn't that far you can  walk it in israel here's something i  found on the left  according to blurted.com it would appear  that jesus carried his cross for a  distance of one half mile thank you  so alexis is half a mile but yeah i  i would be willing to go up to one mile  or something but what's not that far so  anyway but yeah sure great workout  carrying a wooden cross maybe we can do  that at the at the nihilist gym we can  mock other religions with our forms of  exercise  come up with one for islam some physical  feat of strength that muhammad did or  something i i i don't know of anybody  yeah sure  uh i don't know you could you could make  something up for moses too parting the  red sea or something that's a gym  exercise  yeah right right right something like  that  okay so a totally reasonable comment  from a long time follower of the channel  who call is called do you want to give  me lucas i'll call you kiss or i don't  know if you're male or female i don't  know i'm just saying mister kiss or miss  kiss  um but do you want me to kiss says  quote eisel all these authors didn't do  it for you they didn't do the work for  you but most of them have at least one  constructive thought to add to the  discussion okay so kiss  not to my [ __ ] knowledge  i do not know  one thought  jaclyn glenn has to add to this  discussion i do not know one thought  matt dillahunty has to add to this  discussion okay if you don't think matt  delahunty is an idiot  all of you actually do you think you're  smarter than matt delahanty i think you  are i don't think any of you really  believe you're stupider than matt  delante okay  so look  i would love to live in a parallel  universe or what you're saying is true  but it's not true  um  and again none of those people have ever  sent me one email  not even when i've written them first  not positively i've gotten emails from  someone saying no we're not addressed we  don't care [ __ ] off  and i've gotten hate mail about  christmas and about the notre dame  cathedral  the other specific issues i've taken in  atheism but  so no i'm just telling you i don't  believe you  i don't believe any of those people have  even won constructive thought to add to  the discussion and i can't say like  today i can't say like within this  24-hour period if they had something  constructed that they would be here  today but over the last eight years sure  again but i'm i'm being real with you i  don't think there's even one  um you know what do you what do you  think richard dawkins knows that you  don't know  let's keep it all the way what do you  think richard dawkins knows that you  don't know what do you think sam harris  knows that you don't know  jack [ __ ] man it's not what they know is  not worth knowing and it has nothing to  contribute to the discussion nothing  so uh there were some further responses  there's now half an hour ago or an hour  ago but uh matt engino says  um  that he could start his own  youtube channel or he could start his  own platform of some kind  but he says so he says quote you're  right i could start a youtube channel  but would anyone listen  this is my 100 honest response to that  okay  if they don't  if it fails  wouldn't that motivate you to do  something more and something next  like  like  taking a first step  doesn't preclude taking a next step i  think it's going to inform and motivate  you taking the next step right  like you know if the first step you take  is wildly successful then maybe you  don't take any next steps  but like most of this kind of  development in one's own life on a small  scale if you have one person or like a  salon a group of 10 people who work  together five people work together right  like you take one step it fails you take  another step it fails you take another  step it fails now obviously i don't just  mean here within social media i mean any  kind of political activism any kind of  advocacy uh religious secularism but  like a lot of people don't know this uh  jank wieger who is the impresario behind  the young turks youtube channel he had a  series of projects before that that  failed right including a paper uh sorry  public access tv show he had a show  broadcast on tv he had he took a step  and he failed it's like okay that  doesn't work take a next step failed he  did a radio show on uh digital radio  you know i'm not sure exactly what the  server is sirius fm or something okay it  failed right and like his first attempt  at doing youtube show fails right  but he adapted and he innovated and did  something else now again in this case  i'm not limiting it to youtube or social  media but whatever you do like  what i don't get is the people who fail  and then they just continue believing in  the method like these [ __ ] street  protesters for extinction rebellion so  you fail and fail and fail and you keep  doing the same [ __ ]  you're not able to look at the situation  analytically and be like okay well we  tried this  now we've got to do something different  now we're going to do something like  okay so we tried standing in the street  and chanting and that didn't work but  there are people that do it for 20 years  do it for four years their whole lives  the same method again and again  and they never take a step back and  analyze okay what's the effort we're  making what are we putting into this and  what are the outcomes now what we've got  what have we got to do differently what  we've got to change  uh to get the new outcomes but look you  know matt um  [Music]  you know so you you ask a fun question  so i challenged matt before saying hey  why don't you do it instead of  telling this other youtuber to do it you  know what i mean okay matt so you're  asking in effect what difference would  it make just slightly rewarding okay  okay matt it would make a difference to  me  maybe i'm not the only person  but maybe i am  okay it would make a difference  to me  right  i think that's all the [ __ ] answer  you need  and i've reached out to and  done interviews with and done collabs  with and support people have this much  in common with people who aren't vegan  and people you know i've been reaching  out positively for years who the [ __ ]  has been reaching out to support me man  like that's why i'm asking you in this  really confrontational way but like  think about it  so like if this matters to you and if  you want to make a difference in the  next five years or 10 years or something  right  you know now you know again maybe i'm  not the only one but maybe i am maybe  you look back on that and be like well  that really meant something to isil that  there was one other person who stepped  up and said yeah this really matters  you know  well sorry i guess i didn't realize how  many comments are coming in here  okay guys look um  veganism exists  it is a movement even if it's a really  crappy terrible failure of movement even  it's a waste of your time you have to  waste your money  i've been coming to the internet for  years and asking about veganism  look are you  a leader  or are you a  joiner  you know are you going to be a follower  are you going to join somebody else's  movement or are you going to lead your  own thing are you going to innovate your  own solution to these problems you know  is this are you going to take on some  kind of new direction  in talking about atheism in this video  i'm really saying to you  there is no movement there is nothing  for you to join  there's nothing sam harris is doing  that you can sign up for  you know there is no atheist society of  america worth even [ __ ] talking about  worth even dignifying with a critique  in this video  you know there is no way  to be a follower there's no way  to be a joiner either you are gonna lead  either you are gonna make something  happen  or else  nothing is going to happen  at all  i say again  there was no  positive opportunity  in the year 1789  in the year 1791 okay  the positive opportunity we had in the  last 20 years was squandered due to lack  of talent lack of will  the opportunity was there we had a much  better opportunity between the year 2000  year 2020 than anyone had in france in  1789 and none of us had to die none of  us had to risk starvation death by  disease or fighting just for our own  lives you know it's really really tough  uh conditions sorry if you guys ever  it's  tough  it's just physically tough to endure and  you know  there were people out to kill you kill  you in your sleep and shoot you straight  to your face in the in the light of day  it was rough and that's i mean people  tend to only remember the violence of  the revolutionaries against the  christians  well guess what there were groups like  the brotherhood of jesus and so on there  were you know there were christian  brotherhood groups that were out killing  the atheists too there were royalist  groups and traditions there were  pro-aristocrat groups and  you know but a lot of them were  pro-church groups they were fighting for  their the church they were fighting for  their immortal souls who were out there  killing people on the on the other side  so there was there was violence on all  sides it was really tough nobody if you  look back at the last 20 years nobody  was facing those kinds of conditions  nobody was facing those those kinds of  obstacles right  but before  1789 in the century before  we had voltaire  in the century before we had holbach  and helvetius  right we had these books  it's hard to say did they have a greater  or lesser impact than a [ __ ] like  sam harris in our time did like really  how many people actually read helvetius  or or voltaire even how many people  actually read these books compared to  any of the atheist hit authors or daniel  dashad or where the [ __ ] is  these people the the audience reached by  the the four horsemen and so on and so  forth you know what what really was the  social impact of as i said before  pamphlets that were printed and shared  at coffee shops in paris compared to  youtube in our day compared to the  internet today compared to broadcast  media television books  today right probably very limited okay  what they had it wasn't the right time  it wasn't the right place there wasn't  anything that made it easy for anyone  right but they had talent  all right  there were people like voltaire who  wrote things that inspired others into  thinking that a better world was  possible a better life was possible  and that ultimately it was worth  struggling for  i don't have a big audience okay i don't  even those of you who say you're  agnostic or even those you have some  people minded who might say you're some  kind of spiritualist like you're not an  absolute atheist you have some kind of  hippie spiritually  every  single one of you  believes that a better world is possible  every single one of you at least looks  at the mediocrity of america today the  mediocrity of switzerland today the  mediocrity of denmark today the  mediocrity of paris today wherever  you're living the mediocrity of  australia today boy does australia ever  get off easy in these discussions you  know  every single one of you looks at the  mediocrity of the education system in  your country  and the role of religion within it and  you think we can do better  something better is possible you know a  better society is possible the problem  is  what are you  willing to do  to get it  nobody's going to do it for you  sam harris is not coming to save you  jesus is not  coming to save you there is no  atheist  christ  coming to save you and there's no  atheist pope and there's no atheist  church either as i said earlier we don't  even have an atheist peta we're not the  atheist equivalent of the people for  ethical agreement of animals there's no  organization you can you can donate to  all right like when you look ahead to  the next 20 years and you see what's  happening  you see what's happening our period of  moral relativism and whatever the hell  we're going to call post-neo-liberal  globalization  refugee welcoming multiculturalism  you know this ridiculous pretense that  everyone is equal you know and the way  in which you know organized religions  take advantage of that you know you see  what's happening in our society and i i  don't  if you listen to this whole video i  don't single out the muslims like put it  this way i do not think there was  anything wrong with islam that wasn't  already wrong with christianity and  judaism before islam you know what i  mean but however conversely the same  things that are wrong in christianity  and judaism are wrong  in islam  right  so  look guys um  there is no way  i can do a fundraiser for an already  existing cause there's no way i can  point a finger at an organization and  say sign up now there's no way i can  point to  any intellectual rival i have  any author of any book any leader of any  just it's not just jacqueline glenn okay  there's nobody where i could say hey go  support what this guy's doing put it  this way  there is no bernie sanders for atheism  like as flawed a figure as bernie  sanders is if you don't know i have all  kinds of criticism of bernie sanders a  lot of things wrong with bernie sanders  but if what you want is a 15 an hour  minimum wage and better health care for  poor people and cheaper tuition  university i can point to bernie sanders  and say that's the guy that's the  organization to give but those those are  the things you want that's the guy who's  going to do it for you okay what i'm  saying to you about atheism and the  future of religion is  nobody  is gonna do it for you and nobody is  gonna do it for me either  nobody is gonna help me i'm not  expecting one email to come after this  video i'm not expecting one offer of a  collaboration from a publisher think  about it in your own town google right  now how many [ __ ] hippie publishers  are publishing poetry at a loss books of  poetry books of self-indulgent memoir  [ __ ] all kinds of [ __ ] is getting  published inc is getting poured on the  page for all kinds of [ __ ] that's going  to reach a audience of 50 people or  mostly friends friends and family of the  author whenever i look up these small  independent presses they're all they're  all publishing horse [ __ ] okay i've been  doing this for eight years i've reached  whatever almost six million views now if  it's 5.7 million or so on that  okay  i have no publisher for any of my  projects not children's story books not  books about atheism not books about  socrates not books about political  philosophy there is there is no public  i'm not going to get one email from a  publisher i'm not going to get one email  from a podcast i'm not going to make i'm  not going to get one offer from another  youtube channel for a collaboration  nothing is going so even at that level  nobody's going to help let alone  creating an organization like the ymca  an atheist nihilist organization really  has bricks and mortar or something  not one okay i begin this broadcast  alone and i end this broadcast alone  nobody is going to make it easy on you  and nobody is going to make it easy on  me look ahead to the next 20 years of  life on planet earth  okay you tell me  what can you do  and what can we do  to make that change because the most  [ __ ] depressing thing on earth  to admit to yourself that in terms of  the progress of atheism and the progress  of religion  in 2021  the world is a worse place  not a better one than it was in 2001  and you tell me where we're going to be  in 2041 because i have no reason to  think  that things are going to get better  rather than worse